PART 
1STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF 
BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE 
TISSUE
1 Biology of the Normal 
Joint
STEVEN R. GOLDRING • MARY B. GOLDRING
Joints also can be classified according to the connective 
tissues present. Symphyses have a fibrocartilaginous disk 
separating bone ends that are joined by firm ligaments (e.g., 
symphysis pubis and intervertebral joints). In synchondro -
ses, the bone ends are covered with articular cartilage, but 
no synovium or significant joint cavity is present (e.g., ster -
nomanubrial joint). In syndesmoses, the bones are joined 
directly by fibrous ligaments without a cartilaginous inter -
face (the distal tibiofibular articulation is the only joint of 
this type outside the cranial vault). In synostoses, bone 
bridges are formed between bones, producing ankylosis.
Synovial joints, which are classified further according to 
their shapes, include ball-and-socket (hip), hinge (inter -
phalangeal), saddle (first carpometacarpal), and plane 
(patellofemoral) joints. These configurations reflect varying 
functions, as the shapes and sizes of opposing surfaces deter -
mine the direction and extent of motion. The various 
designs permit flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, or 
rotation. Certain joints can act in one (humeroulnar), two 
(wrist), or three (shoulder) axes of motion.
This chapter concentrates on the developmental biology 
and relationship between structure and function of a “pro -
totypic,” “normal” human diarthrodial joint—the joint 
most likely to develop arthritis. Most research that has been 
done concerns the knee because of its accessibility, but 
other joints are described when appropriate.
DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY OF THE 
DIARTHRODIAL JOINT
Skeletal development is initiated by the differentiation of 
mesenchymal cells that arise from three sources: (1) neural 
crest cells of the neural ectoderm that gives rise to cranio -
facial bones; (2) the sclerotome of the paraxial mesoderm, 
or somite compartment, which forms the axial skeleton; and 
(3) the somatopleure of the lateral plate mesoderm, which 
yields the skeleton of the limbs.2 The appendicular skeleton 
develops in the human embryo from limb buds, which first 
are visible at around 4 weeks of gestation. Structures resem -
bling adult joints are generated at approximately 4 to 7 
weeks of gestation.3 Many other crucial phases of musculo -
skeletal development follow, including vascularization of KEY POINTS
Condensation of mesenchymal cells, which differentiate into 
chondrocytes, results in formation of cartilage anlagen, 
which provide the template for the developing skeleton.
During development of the synovial joint, growth 
differentiation factor-5 regulates interzone formation, and 
interference with movement of the embryo during 
development impairs joint cavitation.
Members of the bone morphogenetic protein/transforming 
growth factor- β, fibroblast growth factor, and Wnt families 
and the parathyroid hormone–related peptide/Indian 
hedgehog axis are essential for joint development and 
growth plate formation.
The synovial lining of diarthrodial joints is a thin layer of cells 
lacking a basement membrane and consisting of two 
principal cell types: macrophages and fibroblasts.
The articular cartilage receives its nutritional requirements 
via diffusion from the synovial fluid, and interaction of the 
cartilage with components of the synovial fluid contributes 
to the unique low-friction surface properties of the articular 
cartilage.
CLASSIFICATION OF JOINTS
Human joints provide the structures by which bones join 
with one another and may be classified according to histo -
logic features of the union and range of joint motion. Three 
classes of joint design have been identified: (1) synovial or 
diarthrodial joints ( Figure 1-1 ), which articulate with free 
movement, have a synovial membrane lining the joint 
cavity, and contain synovial fluid; (2) amphiarthroses, in 
which adjacent bones are separated by articular cartilage or 
a fibrocartilage disk and are bound by firm ligaments permit -
ting limited motion (e.g., pubic symphysis, intervertebral 
disks of vertebral bodies, distal tibiofibular articulation, sac -
roiliac joint articulation with pelvic bones); and (3) synar -
throses, which are found only in the skull (suture lines), 
where thin, fibrous tissue separates adjoining cranial plates 
that interlock to prevent detectable motion before the end 
of normal growth, yet permit growth in childhood and 
adolescence.1
12 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Figure 1-1  A normal human interphalangeal joint, in sagittal section, 
as an example of a synovial, or diarthrodial, joint. The tidemark repre -
sents the calcified cartilage that bonds articular cartilage to the subchon -
dral bone plate. (From Sokoloff L, Bland JH: The musculoskeletal system,  
Baltimore, 1975, Williams & Wilkins.  © 1975, Williams & Wilkins Co, 
Baltimore.)
Tide markCartilage
Bone
Periosteum
Capsule
Synovium Figure 1-2  The development of a synovial joint. A, Condensation. 
Joints develop from the blastema, not the surrounding mesenchyme.  
B, Chondrification and formation of the interzone. The interzone remains 
avascular and highly cellular. C, Formation of synovial mesenchyme. 
Synovial mesenchyme forms from the periphery of the interzone and is 
invaded by blood vessels. D, Cavitation. Cavities are formed in the central 
and peripheral interzone and merge to form the joint cavity. E, The 
mature joint. (From O’Rahilly R, Gardner E: The embryology of movable 
joints. In Sokoloff L, editor: The joints and synovial fluid, vol 1, New York, 
1978, Academic Press.)Mesenchyme
BlastemaHomogeneous
interzone
CartilagePerichondrium3-Layered
 interzone Synovial
mesenchyme
Cavities ArticularcapsuleArticular  cavitySynovial
tissueand foldA B C
D E
epiphyseal cartilage (8 to 12 weeks), appearance of villous 
folds in synovium (10 to 12 weeks), evolution of bursae (3 
to 4 months), and appearance of periarticular fat pads (4 to 
5 months).
The upper limbs develop approximately 24 hours earlier 
than analogous portions of the lower limbs. Proximal struc -
tures, such as the glenohumeral joint, develop before more 
distal ones, such as the wrist and hand. As a consequence, 
insults to embryonic development during limb formation 
affect a more distal portion of the upper limb than of the 
lower limb. Long bones are formed as a result of replacement 
of the cartilage template by endochondral ossification. The 
stages of limb development are well described by O’Rahilly 
and Gardner3,4 and are shown in Figure 1-2 . The develop -
mental sequence of events occurring during synovial joint 
formation and some of the regulatory factors and extracel -
lular matrix components involved are summarized in Figures 
1-3 and 1-4 .
Interzone Formation and Joint Cavitation
The morphology of the developing synovial joint and the 
process of joint cavitation have been described in many 
classic studies done on the limbs of mammalian and avian 
embryos.5 In the human embryo, cartilage condensations, 
or chondrifications, can be detected at stage 17, when the 
embryo is small, approximately 11.7 mm long.3,4 In the 
region of the future joint, following formation of the homo -
geneous chondrogenic interzone at 6 weeks (stages 18 and 
19), a three-layered interzone is formed at approximately 7 
weeks (stage 21), which consists of two chondrogenic, perichondrium-like layers that cover the opposing surfaces 
of the cartilage anlagen and are separated by a narrow band 
of densely packed cellular blastema that remains and forms 
the interzone. Cavitation begins in the central interzone at 
about 8 weeks (stage 23).
Although these cellular events associated with joint for -
mation have been recognized for many years, only recently 
have the genes regulating these processes been elucidated. 
These genes include growth differentiation factor (GDF)-5, 
Wnt-14, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2, BMP-4, 
BMP-6, BMP-7, and the GDF-BMP antagonists.5-8 In addi -
tion, joint formation is accompanied by the expression of 
several fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family members, 
including FGF-2 and FGF-4.9 The balance of signaling 
between BMP and FGF determines the rate of proliferation, 
adjusting the pace of differentiation.10 T wo transcription 
factors, Cux-1, a homeobox factor, and the ETS factor 
ERG/C-1-1, are expressed concurrently with GDF-5 and 
Wnt-14 at the onset of joint formation.11,12 Hartmann 
and Tabin13 have proposed two major roles for Wnt-14. 
First, it acts at the onset of joint formation as a negative 
regulator of chondrogenesis. Second, it facilitates interzone 
formation and cavitation by inducing expression of GDF-5 
(also known as cartilage-derived morphogenetic protein-1  
[CDMP-1]), Wnt-4, chordin, and the hyaluronan receptor, 
CD44.13-15 Paradoxically, application of GDF-5 to develop -
ing joints in mouse embryo limbs in organ culture causes 
joint fusion,16 suggesting that temporospatial interactions 
among distinct cell populations are important for the correct 3 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
characterize the matrix produced by mesenchymal cells, 
which switch to the production of types II, IX, and XI col -
lagens that typify the cartilaginous matrix at the time of 
condensation.22 The messenger RNAs (mRNAs) encoding 
the small proteoglycans, biglycan and decorin, may be 
expressed at this time, but the proteins do not appear until 
after cavitation in the regions destined to become articular response. The current view is that GDF-5 is required at early 
stages of condensation, where it stimulates recruitment and 
differentiation of chondrogenic cells, and later, when its 
expression is restricted to the interzone.
The distribution of collagen types and keratan sulfate in 
developing avian and rodent joints has been characterized 
by immunohistochemistry.17-21 Collagen types I and III Figure 1-3  The stages of diarthrodial joint formation and the temporal pattern of expression of the genes involved in regulation at different 
stages. BmP, bone morphogenetic protein; COmP, cartilage oligomeric matrix protein; FgF, fibroblast growth factor; FgFR, fibroblast growth factor 
receptor; Hh, hedgehog; Hox, homeobox; IgF, insulin-like growth factor; Ihh, Indian hedgehog; lef, lymphoid enhancer binding factor; Ptc, patched; 
PTHrP, parathyroid hormone–related protein; Runx, runt domain binding protein; Sox, SRy-related high-mobility group-box protein; Stat, signal trans -
ducer and activator of transcription; TCF, T cell–specific factor; TgF- β, transforming growth factor- β; VEgF, vascular endothelial growth factor; Wnt, 
wingless type. 
Mesenchymal cell
condensationChondrocyte
differentiation Chondrocyte
proliferationChondrocyte
hypertrophy and
vascular invasion Ossification
TGF-β
Wnt-3A, 7A
FGF-2, 4, 8,10
Sonic Hh
BMP-2, 4, 7
HoxA, HoxD
Sox9
Gli3IGF-1
FGF-2/FGFR2BMP-2, 4, 7, 14
Sox9, 5, 6FGF-18/FGFR3
BMP-2, 7
PTHrP
Ihh/Ptc
Stat1
Gli3, 2
Runx2
Fra2/JunDVEGF
FGF-2/FGFR1
Wnt14/
β-catenin
Runx2
OsterixTCF/Lef1Epiphyseal
ossification
center
(secondary)
Diaphyseal
ossification
center
(primary)
Growth
plateBone
collarPerichondriumFGF-2
BMPs
FGF-18
FGF-2
Ptc Gli
PTHrP
BMP-7
Ihh
BMP-2
BMP-6FGFR2
FGFR3
FGFR1Periarticular
(resting)
Proliferating
Prehypertrophic
HypertrophicCollagen II, IX, XI
Aggrecan
COMP
Collagen XOsteocalcin
Figure 1-4  Development of long bones from cartilage anlagen. BmP, bone morphogenetic protein; C-1-1, Erg3 variant; CD44, cell determinant 44; 
Cux, cut-repeat homeobox protein; Erg5, ETS-related gene 5; FgF, fibroblast growth factor; gDF, growth and differentiation factor; gli, glioma-
associated oncogene homolog; Hox, homeobox; IgF, insulin-like growth factor; Ihh, Indian hedgehog; lmx1b, lIm homeodomain transcription factor 
1b; PTHrP, parathyroid hormone–related protein; RA, retinoic acid; r-Fng, radical fringe; Runx, runt domain binding protein; Shh, Sonic hedgehog; Sox, 
SRy-related high-mobility group-box protein; TgF- β, transforming growth factor- β; Wnt, wingless type. 
TGF-β
FGF-2,4,8,10
Wnt-3A,7A
Shh
BMP-2,4,7
Gli3
HoxA, D
r-Fng
Lmx1b
RASox9,5,6
IGF-1
FGF-2,18
BMP-2,4,7,14
PTHrP
IhhSubperiosteal
ringEpiphyseal
ossification
centerDiaphyseal
ossification
center
Wnt14
GDF-5
BMP-2,4
FGF-2
Runx2
Cux1
Erg5Hyaluronan
CD44C-1-1
Articular
cartilage
Joint
maturationCavitation Interzone
formationJoint initiation
and ossificationInterzone formation
and chondrocyte
differentiationMesenchymal
condensationSynovial
capsule4 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
programmed cell death (apoptosis),27 some investigators 
have found no evidence of DNA fragmentation preceding 
cavitation.24,25,28,29 Evidence that metalloproteinases are 
involved in loss of tissue strength in the region undergoing 
cavitation is also lacking.30 Instead, the actual joint cavity 
seems to be formed by mechanospatial changes induced by 
the synthesis of hyaluronan via uridine diphosphoglucose 
dehydrogenase (UDPGD) and hyaluronan synthase. The 
interaction of hyaluronan with its cell surface receptor, 
CD44, modulates cell migration, but it is thought that the 
accumulation of hyaluronan and the associated mechanical 
influences play a major role in forcing the cells apart and 
inducing rupture of the intervening extracellular matrix by 
tensile forces.20,30 This mechanism accounts for the observa -
tion that joint cavitation is incomplete in the absence of 
movement.31,32 Equivalent data from human embryonic cartilage.23 Interzone regions are marked by the expression 
of type IIA collagen by chondrocyte progenitors in the 
perichondrial layers, type IIB and XI collagens by overt 
chondrocytes in the cartilage anlagen, and type I collagen 
in the interzone and in the developing capsule and peri -
chondrium ( Figure 1-5 ).24
The interzone region contains cells in two outer layers 
that are destined to differentiate into chondrocytes and 
become incorporated into the epiphyses, and in a thin inter -
mediate zone that are programmed to undergo joint cavita -
tion and may remain as articular chondrocytes.25 Fluid and 
macromolecules accumulate in this space, creating a nascent 
synovial cavity. Blood vessels appear in the surrounding 
capsulosynovial blastemal mesenchyme before separation of 
adjacent articulating surfaces.26 Although it was first assumed 
that these interzone cells should undergo necrosis or 
Figure 1-5  In situ hybridization of a 13-day-old (stage 39) chicken embryo middle digit, proximal interphalangeal joint, midfrontal sections. A, Bright-
field image shows developing joint and capsule (C). B, Equivalent paraffin section of opposite limb of same animal shows onset of cavitation laterally 
(arrow).  C, Expression of type IIA collagen mRNA in articular surface cells, perichondrium, and capsule. D, Type IIB collagen mRNA is expressed only in 
chondrocytes of the anlagen. E, Type XI collagen mRNA is expressed in the surface cells, perichondrium, and capsule, with lower levels in chondrocytes. 
F, Type I collagen mRNA is present in cells of the interzone and capsule. C through F images are dark field. Calibration bar = 1 µm. (From Nalin AM, 
Greenlee TK Jr, Sandell LJ: Collagen gene expression during development of avian synovial joints: transient expression of types II and XI collagen genes in the 
joint capsule, Develop Dyn 203:352–362, 1995.)
C
C
CC
CA B
C
E FD5 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
oligomeric protein, initiate the transition from chondro-
progenitor cells to a fully committed chondrocyte.2,36-38 
N-cadherin and N-CAM disappear in differentiating chon -
drocytes and are detectable later only in perichondrial cells. 
The differentiated chondrocytes can proliferate and undergo 
the complex process of hypertrophic maturation or remain 
within cartilage elements in articular joints.
Zwilling39 proposed that positional information for orga -
nization of the limb bud was impacted by diffusible agents 
generated at the tip of the limb bud and along its posterior 
margin, promoting the development of a cartilaginous 
anlage along proximal-distal and anterior-posterior axes. 
Limb buds develop from the lateral plate mesoderm.40 Pat-
terning of limb mesenchyme is the result of interactions 
between the mesenchyme and the overlying epithelium.41 
The embryonic limb possesses two signaling centers: the 
apical ectodermal ridge (AER) and the zone of polarizing 
activity (ZPA), which produce signals responsible for direct -
ing proximal-distal outgrowth (AER) and anterior-posterior 
patterning (ZPA).2,36
Much of our current understanding of limb development 
is based on early studies in chickens and more recently in 
mice. Regulatory events are controlled by interacting pat -
terning systems involving FGF , hedgehog, BMP , and Wnt 
pathways, each of which functions sequentially over time 
(see Figure 1-3 ).40 Wnt signaling via β-catenin is required 
to induce FGFs, such as FGF-10 and FGF-8, which act in 
positive feedback loops.40,42 FGF-2, FGF-4, and FGF-8 
(induced by Wnt-3A43), from specialized epithelial cells in 
the AER that are covering the limb bud tip, control 
proximal-distal (shoulder/finger) outgrowth.44 The homeo -
box (Hox) transcription factors encoded by HoxA and 
HoxD gene clusters, which are crucial for early events of 
limb patterning in the undifferentiated mesenchyme, are 
required for the expression of FGF-8 and Sonic hedgehog 
(Shh),45 and they modulate the proliferation of cells within 
the condensations.33 Among the Hox genes, Hoxa13  and 
Hoxd13  enhance and Hoxa11  and Hoxd11  suppress early 
events in the formation of cartilage anlagen.
Wnt-7A is expressed early during limb bud development, 
where it acts to maintain Shh expression.40 Shh, produced 
by a small group of cells in the posterior zone of the ZPA 
(in response to retinoic acid in the mesoderm46 and FGF-4 
in the AER47), plays a key role in directing anterior-posterior 
(e.g., little finger/thumb) patterning46,48 and in stimulating 
expression of BMP-2, BMP-4, BMP-7, and Hox genes.49-51 
Shh signaling, which is required for early limb patterning, 
but not for limb formation, is mediated by the Shh receptor 
Patched (Ptc1), which activates another transmembrane 
protein, Smoothened (Smo), and inhibits processing of the 
Gli3 transcription factor to a transcriptional repressor.42,52 
Dorsal-ventral (e.g., knuckles/palm) patterning depends on 
secretion of Wnt-7A53 and expression of the following tran -
scription factors: radical fringe (r-Fng) by the dorsal ecto -
derm, and engrailed (En-1) and Lmx1b (which is induced 
by Wnt-7A) by the ventral endoderm.42,54
BMP-2, BMP-4, and BMP-7 coordinately regulate the 
patterning of limb elements within condensations depend -
ing on the temporal and spatial expression of BMP receptors 
and BMP antagonists, such as noggin and chordin, as well 
as the availability of SMADs (signaling mammalian homo -
logs of Drosophila  mothers against decapentaplegic).40,55-57 joints are difficult to obtain. In all large joints in humans, 
complete joint cavities are apparent at the beginning of the 
fetal period.
CARTILAGE FORMATION AND 
ENDOCHONDRAL OSSIFICATION
The skeleton develops from the primitive, avascular, densely 
packed cellular mesenchyme, termed the skeletal blastema . 
Common precursor mesenchymal cells divide into chondro -
genic, myogenic, and osteogenic lineages that determine 
the differentiation of cartilage centrally, muscle peripher -
ally, and bone. Surrounding tissues, particularly epithelium, 
influence the differentiation of mesenchymal progenitor 
cells to chondrocytes in cartilage anlagen. The cartilaginous 
nodules appear in the middle of the blastema; simultane -
ously, cells at the periphery become flattened and elongated 
to form the perichondrium. In the vertebral column, carti -
lage disks arise from portions of the somites surrounding the 
notochord, and nasal and auricular cartilage and the embry -
onic epiphysis form from the perichondrium. In the limb, 
the cartilage remains as a resting zone that later becomes 
the articular cartilage, or it undergoes terminal hypertrophic 
differentiation to become calcified (growth plate formation) 
and is replaced by bone (endochondral ossification). The 
latter process requires extracellular matrix remodeling and 
vascularization (angiogenesis). These events are controlled 
exquisitely by cellular interactions with the surrounding 
matrix, growth and differentiation factors, and other envi -
ronmental factors that initiate or suppress cellular signaling 
pathways and transcription of specific genes in a temporo -
spatial manner.
Condensation and Limb Bud Formation
Formation of cartilage anlagen occurs in four stages: (1) cell 
migration, (2) aggregation regulated by mesenchymal-
epithelial cell interactions, (3) condensation, and (4) overt 
chondrocyte differentiation, or chondrification.3,4,33 Interac -
tions with the epithelium determine mesenchymal cell 
recruitment and migration, proliferation, and condensa -
tion.3,4,34 The aggregation of chondroprogenitor mesenchy -
mal cells into precartilage condensations was first described 
by Fell33 and depends on signals initiated by cell-cell and 
cell-matrix interactions, the formation of gap junctions, and 
changes in the cytoskeletal architecture. Before condensa -
tion, the prechondrocytic mesenchymal cells produce extra -
cellular matrix that is rich in hyaluronan and type I collagen 
and type IIA collagen, which contains the exon-2–encoded 
aminopropeptide found in noncartilage collagens.35 The 
initiation of condensation is associated with increased hyal -
uronidase activity and the appearance of cell adhesion mol -
ecules, neural cadherin (N-cadherin), and the neural cell 
adhesion molecule (N-CAM), all of which facilitate cell-
cell interactions.
Before chondrocyte differentiation, cell-matrix interac -
tions are facilitated by fibronectin binding to syndecan, 
downregulating N-CAM and setting condensation bound -
aries. Increased cell proliferation and extracellular matrix 
remodeling, with the disappearance of type I collagen, fibro -
nectin, and N-cadherin, and the appearance of tenascins, 
matrilins, and thrombospondins, including cartilage  6 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
In the growth plate, FGFR3 serves as a master inhibitor 
of chondrocyte proliferation via phosphorylation of the 
Stat1 transcription factor, which increases expression of the 
cell cycle inhibitor p21.69 More recent studies suggest 
that FGF-18 is the preferred ligand of FGFR3 because 
Fgf18-deficient mice have an expanded zone of proliferating 
chondrocytes similar to that in Fgfr3-deficient mice, and 
that FGF-18 can inhibit Indian hedgehog (Ihh) expres -
sion.70 FGF-18 and FGF-9 are expressed in the perichon -
drium and periosteum and form a functional gradient  
from the proximal proliferating zone, where FGF-18 acts  
via FGFR3 to downregulate proliferation and subsequent 
maturation.70,71 FGF-18 and FGF-9 interact with FGFR1 in 
the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic zones, where more 
recent evidence indicates that they regulate vascular inva -
sion by inducing the expression of vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) and VEGFR1. As the epiphyseal 
growth plate develops, FGFR3 disappears, and FGFR1 
expression is upregulated in prehypertrophic and hypertro -
phic chondrocytes, suggesting a role for FGFR1 in the regu -
lation of cell survival and differentiation and possibly cell 
death.67
The proliferation of chondrocytes in the lower prolifera -
tive and prehypertrophic zones is under the control of a 
local negative feedback loop involving signaling by parathy -
roid hormone–related protein (PTHrP) and Ihh.72 Ihh 
expression is restricted to the prehypertrophic zone, and the 
PTHrP receptor is expressed in the distal zone of periarticu -
lar chondrocytes. Adjacent, surrounding perichondrial cells 
express the Hedgehog receptor patched (Ptc), which on Ihh 
binding, similar to Shh in the mesenchymal condensations, 
activates Smo and induces Gli transcription factors; this can 
feedback regulate Ihh target genes in a positive ( Gli1 and 
Gli2) or negative ( Gli3) manner.73 Ihh induces expression 
of PTHrP in the perichondrium,74 and PTHrP signaling 
stimulates cell proliferation via its receptor expressed in the 
periarticular chondrocytes.75 These interactions are modu -
lated by a balance of BMP and FGF signaling that adjusts 
the pace of chondrocyte terminal differentiation to the pro -
liferation rate.10 FGF-18 or FGFR3 signaling can inhibit Ihh 
expression,70 and BMP signaling upregulates the expression 
of Ihh in cells that are beyond the range of the PTHrP-
induced signal.10 Evidence indicates that Ihh acts indepen -
dently of PTHrP on periarticular chondrocytes to stimulate 
differentiation of columnar chondrocytes in the prolifera -
tive zone, whereas PTHrP acts by preventing premature 
differentiation into prehypertrophic and hypertrophic 
chondrocytes, suppressing premature expression of Ihh.76 
Ihh and PTHrP , by transiently inducing proliferation 
markers and repressing differentiation markers, function in 
a temporospatial manner to determine the number of cells 
that remain in the chondrogenic lineage versus the number 
that enter the endochondral ossification pathway.72,77
Endochondral Ossification
The development of long bones from the cartilage anlagen 
occurs by a process termed endochondral ossification,  which 
involves terminal differentiation of chondrocytes to the 
hypertrophic phenotype, cartilage matrix calcification, vas -
cular invasion, and ossification (see Figure 1-4 ).28,77-79 This 
process is initiated when cells in the central region of the In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that BMP signaling 
is required for the formation of precartilaginous condensa -
tions and for the differentiation of precursors into chon-
drocytes.58 Growth of the condensation ceases when 
noggin inhibits BMP signaling and permits overt differen -
tiation to chondrocytes, which often are designated as chon-
droblasts.  The cartilage formed serves as a template for 
formation of cartilage elements in the vertebra, sternum, 
and rib, and for limb elongation or endochondral bone 
formation.
Molecular Signals in Cartilage Morphogenesis 
and Growth Plate Development
The cartilage anlagen grow by cell division and deposition 
of the extracellular matrix and by apposition of proliferating 
cells from the inner chondrogenic layer of the perichon -
drium. The nuclear transcription factor, Sox9, is one of the 
earliest markers expressed in cells undergoing condensation 
and is required for the subsequent stage of chondrogenesis 
characterized by the deposition of matrix containing  
collagens II, IX, and XI and aggrecan in the cartilage 
anlagen.59,60 T wo additional Sox family members, L-Sox5 
and Sox6, which are not present in early mesenchymal 
condensations but are coexpressed with Sox9 during chon -
drocyte differentiation,61 have a high degree of sequence 
identity with each other but have no sequence homology 
with Sox9, except in the high-mobility group (HMG) box. 
They can form homodimers or heterodimers, which bind 
more efficiently to pairs of HMG box sites than to single 
sites, and in contrast to Sox9, they contain no transcrip -
tional activation domain. The expression of SOX proteins 
depends on BMP signaling via BMPR1A and BMPR1B, 
which are functionally redundant and active in chondro -
cyte condensations but not in the perichondrium.58 L-Sox5 
and Sox6 are required for the expression of Col9a1, aggre -
can, link protein, and Col2a1 during overt chondrocyte 
differentiation.62 The runt domain transcription factor, 
Runx2 (also known as core binding factor,  Cbfa1), is expressed 
in all condensations, including those that are destined to 
form bone.63-65
Throughout chondrogenesis, the balance of signaling by 
BMPs and FGFs determines the rate of proliferation while 
adjusting the pace of differentiation.10 In the long bones, 
long after condensation, BMP-2, BMP-3, BMP-4, BMP-5, 
and BMP-7 are expressed primarily in the perichondrium, 
and only BMP-7 is expressed in the proliferating chondro -
cytes.10 BMP-6 is found later exclusively in hypertrophic 
chondrocytes along with BMP-2. More than 23 FGFs have 
been identified so far.66 The specific ligands that activate 
each FGF receptor (R) during chondrogenesis in vivo have 
been difficult to identify because signaling depends on the 
temporal and spatial location of not only the ligands, but 
also the receptors.67 FGFR2 is upregulated early in condens -
ing mesenchyme and is present later in the periphery of the 
condensation along with FGFR1, which is expressed in sur -
rounding loose mesenchyme. FGFR3 is associated with pro -
liferation of chondrocytes in the central core of the 
mesenchymal condensation and may overlap with FGFR2. 
Proliferation of chondrocytes in the embryonic and postna -
tal growth plate is regulated by multiple mitogenic stimuli, 
including FGFs, which converge on cyclin D1.687 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
VEGF120 (VEGFA), regulates chondrocyte survival and 
epiphyseal cartilage angiogenesis.98-100 VEGF164 can be 
soluble or matrix bound and may act directly on chondro -
cytes via Npn2. VEGF is released from the extracellular 
matrix by MMPs, including MMP-9, membrane-type 
(MT)1-MMP (MMP-14), and MMP-13. MMP-9 is 
expressed by endothelial cells that migrate into the central 
region of the hypertrophic cartilage.90 MMP-14, which has 
a broader range of expression than MMP-9, is essential for 
chondrocyte proliferation and secondary ossification,101 
whereas MMP-13 is found exclusively in late hypertrophic 
chondrocytes.82 These events of cartilage matrix remodeling 
and vascular invasion are required for the migration  
and differentiation of osteoclasts and osteoblasts, which 
remove the mineralized cartilage matrix and replace it  
with bone.
Development of the Joint Capsule and 
Synovium
The interzone and the contiguous perichondrial envelope, 
of which the interzone is a part, contain the mesenchymal 
cell precursors that give rise to other joint components, 
including the joint capsule, synovial lining, menisci, intra -
capsular ligaments, and tendons.3,4,102,103 The external 
mesenchymal tissue condenses as a fibrous capsule. The 
peripheral mesenchyme becomes vascularized and is incor -
porated as the synovial mesenchyme, which differentiates 
into a pseudomembrane at about the same time as cavita -
tion begins in the central interzone (stage 23, approxi -
mately 8 weeks). The menisci arise from eccentric portions 
of the articular interzone. In common usage, the term 
synovium  refers to the true synovial lining and the subjacent 
vascular and areolar tissue, up to—but excluding—the 
capsule. Synovial lining cells can be distinguished as  
soon as multiple cavities within the interzone begin to 
coalesce. At first, these are exclusively fibroblast-like (type 
B) cells.
As the joint cavity increases in size, synovial lining cell 
layers expand through proliferation of fibroblast-like cells 
and recruitment of macrophage-like (type A) cells from the 
circulation.104 The synovial lining cells express the hyaluro -
nan receptor, CD44, and UDPGD, the levels of which 
remain elevated after cavitation. This increased activity 
likely contributes to the high concentration of hyaluronan 
in joint fluids.30,105 Further synovial expansion results in the 
appearance of synovial villi at the end of the second month, 
early in the fetal period, which greatly increases the surface 
area available for exchange between the joint cavity and 
the vascular space. Cadherin-11 is an additional molecule 
expressed by synovial lining cells.106,107 It is essential for 
establishment of synovial lining architecture during devel -
opment, where its expression correlates with cell migration 
and tissue outgrowth of the synovial lining.
The role of innervation in the developing joint is not 
well understood. A dense capillary network develops in the 
subsynovial tissue, with numerous capillary loops that pen -
etrate into the true synovial lining layer. The human syno -
vial microvasculature is already innervated by 8 weeks 
(stage 23) of gestation, around the time of joint cavita -
tion,102 as is shown by immunoreactivity for the neuronal 
“housekeeping” enzymes.108 Evidence of neurotransmitter anlage begin to hypertrophy, increasing cellular fluid volume 
by almost 20 times. Ihh plays a pivotal role in regulating 
endochondral bone formation by synchronizing perichon -
drial maturation with chondrocyte hypertrophy, which is 
essential for initiating the process of vascular invasion.80 Ihh 
is expressed in prehypertrophic chondrocytes as they exit 
the proliferative phase and enter the hypertrophic phase,  
at which time they begin to express the hypertrophic  
chondrocyte marker, type X collagen (Col10a1), and alka -
line phosphatase. These cells are responsible for laying 
down the cartilage matrix, which subsequently undergoes 
mineralization.
Runx2, which serves as a positive regulatory factor in 
chondrocyte maturation to hypertrophy,81 is expressed in 
the adjacent perichondrium and in prehypertrophic chon -
drocytes, but less in late hypertrophic chondrocytes,82,83 
overlapping with Ihh, Col10a1, and BMP-6.77,84 BMP-
induced Smad1 interacts with Runx2, and Runx2 and 
Smad1 are important for chondrocyte hypertrophy.81,85,86 An 
essential role for Runx2 in the process of chondrocyte 
hypertrophy is supported by the observation that terminal 
differentiation is blocked in Runx2-deficient mice.64,87 
Interactions with components of the extracellular matrix 
also contribute to regulation of the process of chondrocyte 
terminal differentiation. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-
13, a downstream target of Runx2, is expressed by terminal 
hypertrophic chondrocytes,88-91 and MMP-13 deficiency 
results in significant interstitial collagen accumulation, 
leading to a delay in endochondral ossification in the  
growth plate with increased length of the hypertrophic 
zone.92,93
In contrast, Col10a1 knockout mice and transgenic mice 
with a dominant interference Col10a1  mutation have subtle 
growth plate phenotypes with compressed proliferative and 
hypertrophic zones and altered mineral deposition.94 Muta -
tions in the COL10a1  gene are associated with the dwarfism 
observed in human chondrodysplasias. These mutations 
affect regions of the growth plate that are under great 
mechanical stress, and it has been suggested that the defect 
in skeletal growth may be due in part to alteration of the 
mechanical integrity of the pericellular matrix in the hyper -
trophic zone, although a role for defective vascularization 
also has been proposed.95 The extracellular matrix remodel -
ing that accompanies chondrocyte terminal differentiation 
is thought to induce an alteration in the environmental 
stress experienced by hypertrophic chondrocytes, which 
eventually undergo apoptosis.77,96,97 Together these studies 
indicate that the composition and remodeling of the extra -
cellular matrix play an important role in processes associ -
ated with chondrocyte hypertrophy, vascular invasion, and, 
as discussed subsequently, osteoblast recruitment and subse -
quent bone formation.90
Vascular invasion of the hypertrophic zone is required  
for the replacement of calcified cartilage by bone.84,91 The 
angiogenic factor, VEGF , promotes vascular invasion by spe -
cifically activating localized receptors, including Flk 
expressed in endothelial cells in the perichondrium or sur -
rounding soft tissues, neuropilin 1 (Npn1) expressed in late 
hypertrophic chondrocytes, or Npn2 expressed exclusively 
in the perichondrium.28 VEGF is expressed as three different 
isoforms: VEGF188, a matrix-bound form, is essential for 
metaphyseal vascularization, whereas the soluble form, 8 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
from the central site of the original condensation, which 
forms the cartilage anlage resembling the shape of the future 
bone, toward the ends of the forming bones. During joint 
cavitation, the peripheral interzone is absorbed into each 
adjacent cartilaginous zone, evolving into the articular 
surface. The articular surface is destined to become a spe -
cialized cartilaginous structure that does not normally 
undergo vascularization and ossification.
More recent evidence indicates that postnatal matura -
tion of the articular cartilage involves an appositional 
growth mechanism originating from progenitor cells at the 
articular surface, rather than by an interstitial mechanism.114 
The chondrocytes of mature articular cartilage are termi -
nally differentiated cells that are capable of expressing 
cartilage-specific matrix molecules, such as type II collagen 
and aggrecan (see following section).19,21,24 Through the 
processes described previously, the articular joint spaces are 
developed and are lined on all surfaces by cartilage or by 
synovial lining cells. These two different tissues merge at 
the enthesis, the region at the periphery of the joint where 
the cartilage melds into bone, and where ligaments and the 
capsule are attached.118 In the postnatal growth plate, dif -
ferentiation of the perichondrium also is linked to differen -
tiation of the chondrocytes in the epiphysis to form the 
different zones of the growth plate, contributing to longitu -
dinal bone growth.28,77
ORGANIZATION AND PHYSIOLOGY OF 
THE MATURE JOINT
The unique structural properties and biochemical compo -
nents of diarthrodial joints make them extraordinarily 
durable load-bearing devices.119 The mature diarthrodial 
joint is a complex structure, influenced by its environment 
and by mechanical demands (see Chapter 6). Structural 
differences between joints are determined by their different 
functions. The shoulder joint, which demands an enormous 
range of motion, is stabilized primarily by muscles, whereas 
the hip, requiring motion and antigravity stability, has an 
intrinsically stable ball-and-socket configuration. Compo -
nents of the “typical” synovial joint include synovium, 
muscles, tendons, ligaments, bursae, menisci, articular car -
tilage, and subchondral bone. The anatomy and physiology 
of muscles are described in detail in Chapter 5.
Synovium
The synovium lines the joint cavity and is the sight of 
production of synovial fluid that provides nutrition for the 
articular cartilage and lubricates the cartilage surfaces. It is 
a thin membrane between the fibrous joint capsule and the 
fluid-filled synovial cavity that attaches to skeletal tissues at 
the bone-cartilage interface and does not encroach on the 
surface of the articular cartilage. It is divided into functional 
compartments: the lining region (synovial intima), the sub -
intimal stroma, and the neurovasculature ( Figure 1-6 ). The 
synovial intima, also termed synovial lining,  is the superficial 
layer of the normal synovium that is in contact with the 
intra-articular cavity.105,120 The synovial lining is loosely 
attached to the subintima, which contains blood vessels, 
lymphatics, and nerves. Capillaries and arterioles generally function is not found until much later, however, with the 
appearance of the sensory neuropeptide, substance P , at 11 
weeks. The putative sympathetic neurotransmitter, neuro -
peptide Y, appears at 13 weeks of gestation, along with the 
catecholamine-synthesizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase. 
The finding that the Slit2 gene, which functions for the 
guidance of neuronal axons and neurons, is expressed in the 
mesenchyme adjacent to the AER (stages 20 to 22) and in 
the peripheral mesenchyme of the limb bud (stages 23 to 
28) suggests that innervation is an integral part of synovial 
joint development.109
Development of Nonarticular Joints
In contrast to articular joints, the temporomandibular joint 
develops slowly, with cavitation at a crown-rump length of 
57 to 75 mm (i.e., well into the fetal stage).110 This slow 
development may occur because this joint develops in the 
absence of a continuous blastema and involves the insertion 
between bone ends of a fibrocartilaginous disk that arises 
from muscular and mesenchymal derivatives of the first pha -
ryngeal arch.
The development of other types of joints, such as synar -
throses, is similar to that of diarthrodial joints, except that 
cavitation does not occur and synovial mesenchyme is not 
formed. In these respects, synarthroses and amphiarthroses 
resemble the “fused” peripheral joints induced by paralyzing 
chicken embryos,111 and they may develop as they do 
because there is relatively little motion during their 
formation.
Human vertebrae and intervertebral disks develop as 
units, each derived from a homogeneous blastema arising 
from a somite. Each embryonic intervertebral disk serves as 
a rostral and caudal chondrogenic zone for the two adjacent 
evolving vertebral bodies. The periphery of the embryonic 
“disk” is replaced by the annulus fibrosus.112 The interverte -
bral disk bears many similarities to the joint; the annulus is 
the joint capsule, the nucleus pulposus is the joint cavity, 
and the vertebral end plates are the cartilage-covered bone 
ends composing the articulation. The proteoglycans and 
collagens expressed during development of the interverte -
bral disk have been mapped and reflect the complex 
structure-function relationships that allow flexibility and 
resistance to compression in the spine.113-116
Development of Articular Cartilage
In the vertebrate skeleton, cartilage is the product of cells 
from three distinct embryonic lineages. Craniofacial carti -
lage is formed from cranial neural crest cells, the cartilage 
of the axial skeleton (intervertebral disks, ribs, and sternum) 
forms from paraxial mesoderm (somites), and the articular 
cartilage of the limbs is derived from the lateral plate meso -
derm.2 In the developing limb bud, mesenchymal condensa -
tions, followed by chondrocyte differentiation and 
maturation, occur in digital zones, whereas undifferentiated 
mesenchymal cells in the interdigital web zones undergo 
cell death.117 Embryonic cartilage is destined for one of 
several fates: It can remain as permanent cartilage, as on 
the articular surfaces of bones, or it can provide a template 
for the formation of bones by endochondral ossification. 
During development, chondrocyte maturation expands 9 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
intercellular junctions, and desmosomes. Instead, synovial 
lining cells lie loosely in a bed of hyaluronate interspersed 
with collagen fibrils. This is the macromolecular sieve that 
imparts the semipermeable nature of the synovium. The 
absence of any true basement membrane is a major deter -
minant of joint physiology.
Early electron microscopic studies characterized lining 
cells as macrophage-derived type A synoviocytes and 
fibroblast-derived type B synoviocytes.129 High UDPGD 
activity and CD55 are used to distinguish type B synovial 
cells, whereas nonspecific esterase and CD68 typify type A 
cells.130,131 Normal synovium is lined predominantly by 
fibroblast-like cells, whereas macrophage-like cells account 
for only 10% to 20% of lining cells (see Figure 1-6 ).
Type A, macrophage-like synovial cells contain vacu -
oles, a prominent Golgi apparatus, and filopodia, but they 
have little rough endoplasmic reticulum. These cells express 
numerous cell surface markers of the monocyte-macrophage 
lineage, including CD11b, CD68, CD14, CD163, and the 
immunoglobulin (Ig)G Fc receptor, Fc γRIIIa.105 Synovial 
intimal macrophages are phagocytic and may provide a 
mechanism by which particulate matter can be cleared from 
the normal joint cavity. Similar to other tissue macrophages, 
these cells have little capacity to proliferate and are likely 
localized to the joint during development. The op/op osteo -
petrotic mouse that is deficient in macrophages because of 
an absence of macrophage colony-stimulating factor also 
lacks synovial macrophages.132 This finding provides further 
evidence that type A synovial cells are of a common lineage 
with other tissue macrophages. Although they represent 
only a small percentage of cells in the normal synovium, 
macrophages are recruited from the circulation during syno -
vial inflammation, in part from subchondral bone marrow 
through vascular channels near the enthesis.
The type B, fibroblast-like synovial cell contains fewer 
vacuoles and filopodia than type A cells and has abundant 
protein-synthetic organelles. Similar to other fibroblasts, 
lining cells express the collagen synthesis enzyme and  
synthesize extracellular matrix components, including col -
lagens, sulfated proteoglycans, fibronectin, fibrillin-1, and are located directly underneath the synovial intima, whereas 
venules are located closer to the joint capsule.
A transition from loose to dense connective tissue occurs 
from the joint cavity to the capsule. Most cells in the normal 
subintimal stroma are fibroblasts and macrophages, although 
adipocytes and occasional mast cells are present.105 These 
compartments are not circumscribed by basement mem -
branes but nonetheless have distinct functions; they are 
separated from each other by chemical barriers, such as 
membrane peptidases, which limit the diffusion of regula -
tory factors between compartments. Synovial compartments 
are unevenly distributed within a single joint. Vascularity is 
high at the enthesis, where synovium, ligament, and carti -
lage coalesce.121 Far from being a homogeneous tissue in 
continuity with the synovial cavity, synovium is highly het -
erogeneous, and synovial fluid may be poorly representative 
of the tissue-fluid composition of any synovial tissue com -
partment. In rheumatoid arthritis, the synovial lining of 
diarthrodial joints is the site of the initial inflammatory 
process.122,123 This lesion is characterized by proliferation of 
synovial lining cells, increased vascularization, and infiltra -
tion of the tissue by inflammatory cells, including lympho -
cytes, plasma cells, and activated macrophages (see  
Chapter 53).124-126
Synovial Lining
The synovial lining, a specialized condensation of mesen -
chymal cells and extracellular matrix, is located between 
the synovial cavity and the stroma. In normal synovium, 
the lining layer is two to three cells deep, although intra-
articular fat pads usually are covered by only a single layer 
of synovial cells, and ligaments and tendons are covered by 
synovial cells that are widely separated. At some sites, lining 
cells are absent, and extracellular connective tissue consti -
tutes the lining layer.127 Such “bare areas” become increas -
ingly frequent with advancing age.128 Although the synovial 
lining is often referred to as the synovial membrane,  the term 
membrane  is more correctly reserved for endothelial and 
epithelial tissues that have basement membranes, tight Figure 1-6  A, Schematic representation of normal human synovium. The intima contains specialized fibroblasts expressing vascular cell adhesion 
molecule-1 (VCAm-1) and uridine diphosphoglucose (UDPg) and specialized macrophages expressing Fc γRIIIa. The deeper subintima contains unspe -
cialized counterparts. B, microvascular endothelium in human synovium contains receptors for the vasodilator/growth factor substance P. Silver grains 
represent specific binding of [125I]Bolton Hunter–labeled substance P to synovial microvessels (arrows).  Arrowheads indicate the synovial surface. 
Emulsion-dipped in vitro receptor autoradiography preparations with hematoxylin and eosin counterstain. Calibration bar = 1 µm. (A, From Edwards 
JCW: Fibroblast biology: development and differentiation of synovial fibroblasts in arthritis, Arthritis Res  2:344–347, 2000.)
B
 AIntimal
macrophageIntimal
fibroblasts Synovial fluid
Subintimal
macrophage
Blood vesselsSubintimal
fibroblast10 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
region, the surfaces of intra-articular ligaments, and the 
entheses (in the angle of ligamentous insertions into bone) 
are particularly well vascularized.121
The distribution of synovial vessels, which were formed 
largely as a result of vasculogenesis during development of 
the joint, displays considerable plasticity. Vasculogenesis is 
a dynamic process that depends on cellular interactions 
with regulatory factors and the extracellular matrix that are 
also important in angiogenesis. In inflammatory arthritis, 
the density of blood vessels decreases relative to the growing 
synovial mass, creating a hypoxic and acidotic environ -
ment.141,142 Angiogenic factors such as VEGF , acting via 
VEGF receptors 1 and 2 (Flt-1 and Flk-1), and basic FGF 
promote proliferation and migration of endothelial cells—a 
process that is facilitated by matrix-degrading enzymes and 
adhesion molecules such as integrin αvβ3 and E-selectin, 
expressed by activated endothelial cells.143-145 Vessel matura -
tion is facilitated by angiopoietin-1 acting via the Tie-2 
receptor. Angiogenic molecules are restricted to the capil -
lary epithelium in normal synovium, but their levels are 
elevated in inflamed synovium in perivascular sites and 
areas remote from vessels.146,147
Regulation of Synovial Blood Flow
Synovial blood flow is regulated by intrinsic (autocrine and 
paracrine) and extrinsic (neural and humoral) systems. 
Locally generated factors, such as the peptide vasoconstric -
tors angiotensin II and endothelin-1, act on adjacent arte -
riolar smooth muscle to regulate regional vascular tone.121 
Normal synovial arterioles are richly innervated by sympa -
thetic nerves containing vasoconstrictors, such as norepi -
nephrine and neuropeptide Y, and by “sensory” nerves that 
also play an efferent vasodilatory role by releasing neuro -
peptides, such as substance P and calcitonin gene–related 
peptide.148,149 Arterioles regulate regional blood flow. Capil -
laries and postcapillary venules are sites of fluid and cellular 
exchange. Correspondingly, regulatory systems are differen -
tially distributed along the vascular axis. Angiotensin-
converting enzyme, which generates angiotensin II, is 
localized predominantly in arteriolar and capillary endothe -
lia and is decreased during inflammation.150 Specific recep -
tors for angiotensin II and for substance P are abundant on 
synovial capillaries, with lower densities on adjacent arteri -
oles. Dipeptidyl peptidase IV , a peptide-degrading enzyme, 
is specifically localized to the cell membranes of venular 
endothelium. The synovial vasculature not only is function -
ally compartmentalized from the surrounding stroma, but is 
also highly specialized along its arteriovenous axis. Other 
unique characteristics of the normal synovial vasculature 
include the presence of inducible nitric oxidase synthase–
independent 3-nitrotyrosine, a reaction product of per -
oxynitrite,151 and localization of the synoviocyte-derived 
CXCL12 chemokine on heparan sulfate receptors on endo -
thelial cells,152 suggesting physiologic roles for these mole -
cules in normal vascular function.
Joint Innervation
Dissection studies have shown that each joint has a dual 
nerve supply, consisting of specific articular nerves that pen -
etrate the capsule as independent branches of adjacent tenascin.105,133 They have the potential to proliferate, 
although proliferation markers are rarely seen in normal 
synovium.134 In contrast to stromal fibroblasts, synovial 
intimal fibroblasts express UDPGD and synthesize hyaluro -
nan, an important constituent of synovial fluid.105 They also 
synthesize lubricin, which, together with hyaluronan, is 
necessary for the low-friction interaction of cartilage sur -
faces in the diarthrodial joint. Synovial lining cells bear 
abundant membrane peptidases on their surface, capable of 
degrading a wide range of regulatory peptides, such as sub -
stance P and angiotensin II.135 These enzymes may be 
important in limiting the diffusion of these potent peptide 
mediators away from the immediate vicinity of their site of 
release and action.
Normal synovial lining cells also express a rich array of 
adhesion molecules, including CD44, the principal receptor 
for hyaluronan; vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-
1; and intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1.105,136-138 
They are essential for cellular attachment to specific matrix 
components in the synovial lining region, preventing loss 
into the synovial cavity of cells subjected to deformation 
and shear stresses during joint movement. Adhesion  
molecules such as VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 potentially are 
involved in the recruitment of inflammatory cells during the 
evolution of arthritis. Cadherins mediate cell-cell adhesion 
between adjacent cells of the same type. The identification 
of cadherin-11 as a key adhesion molecule that regulates 
formation of the synovial lining during development and 
the synoviocyte function postnatally has provided the 
opportunity to examine its role in inflammatory joint 
disease.106 Recent studies have shown that cadherin-11 is 
highly expressed in fibroblast-like cells at the pannus-
cartilage interface in rheumatoid synovium, where it plays 
a role in the invasive properties of the synovial fibroblasts139; 
treatment with a cadherin-11 antibody or a cadherin-11 
fusion protein has been shown to reduce synovial inflam -
mation and cartilage erosion in an animal model of 
arthritis.107
Synovial Vasculature
The subintimal synovium contains blood vessels, which 
provide the blood flow required for solute and gas exchange 
in the synovium itself and for generation of synovial fluid.121 
The avascular articular cartilage also depends on nutrition 
in the synovial fluid, derived from the synovial vasculature. 
The vascularized synovium behaves similar to an endocrine 
organ, generating factors that regulate synoviocyte function 
and serving as a selective gateway that recruits cells from 
the circulation during stress and inflammation.140 Finally, 
synovial blood flow plays an important role in regulating 
intra-articular temperature.
The synovial vasculature can be divided, on morphologic 
and functional grounds, into arterioles, capillaries, and 
venules. In addition, lymphatics accompany arterioles and 
larger venules.105,121 Arterial and venous networks of the 
joint are complex and are characterized by arteriovenous 
anastomoses that communicate freely with blood vessels in 
periosteum and periarticular bone. As large synovial arteries 
enter the deep layers of the synovium near the capsule, they 
give off branches, which bifurcate again to form microvas -
cular units  in the subsynovial layers. The synovial lining 11 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
symptom described by patients with chronically inflamed 
joints caused by rheumatoid arthritis. Chronically inflamed 
joints may not be painful at rest, however, unless acutely 
inflamed.163
Tendons
Tendons are functional and anatomic bridges between 
muscle and bone.164,165 They focus the force of a large mass 
of muscle into a localized area on bone and, by splitting to 
form numerous insertions, may distribute the force of a 
single muscle to different bones. Tendons are formed of 
longitudinally arranged collagen fibrils embedded in an 
organized, hydrated proteoglycan matrix with blood vessels, 
lymphatics, and fibroblasts.166 Cross-links between adjacent 
collagen chains or molecules contribute to the tensile 
strength of the tendon.167,168 Tendon collagen fibrillogenesis 
is initiated during early development through a highly 
ordered process of alignment involving the actin cytoskel -
eton and cadherin-11.169,170 Many tendons, particularly 
tendons with a large range of motion, run through vascular -
ized, discontinuous sheaths of collagen lined with mesen -
chymal cells resembling synovium. Gliding of tendons 
through their sheaths is enhanced by hyaluronic acid pro -
duced by the lining cells. Tendon movement is essential for 
the embryogenesis and maintenance of tendons and their 
sheaths. Degenerative changes appear in tendons, and 
fibrous adhesions are formed between tendons and sheaths 
when inflammation or surgical incision is followed by long 
periods of immobilization.171 At the myotendinous junction, 
recesses between muscle cell processes are filled with col -
lagen fibrils, which blend into the tendon. At its other end, 
collagen fibers of the tendon typically blend into fibrocarti -
lage or mineralize, and merge into bone through a fibrocar -
tilaginous transition zone termed the enthesis,  or insertion 
site.172
Tendon fibroblasts synthesize and secrete collagens, pro -
teoglycans, and other matrix components, such as fibronec -
tin and tenascin C, and MMPs and their inhibitors, which 
can contribute to the breakdown and repair of tendon com -
ponents.166,173-176 Collagen fibrils in tendon are composed 
primarily of type I collagen with some type III collagen, but 
regional differences in the distribution of other matrix com -
ponents have been noted. The compressed region contains 
the small proteoglycans—biglycan, decorin, fibromodulin, 
and lumican—and a large proteoglycan—versican.177,178 
Major components in the tensile region of the tendon are 
decorin, microfibrillar type VI collagen, fibromodulin, and 
the proline and arginine-rich end leucine-rich repeat 
protein (PRELP). The presence of cartilage oligomeric 
matrix protein, aggrecan, biglycan, and collagen types II, 
IX, and XI is indicative of fibrocartilage.179,180 The collagen 
fiber orientation at the tendon-to-bone enthesis is impor -
tant for maintaining microarchitecture by reducing stress 
concentrations and shielding the outward splay of insertion 
from the highest stresses.181 Understanding the structure has 
implications for tendon repair because motion between a 
tendon graft and a bone tunnel may impair early graft incor -
poration, leading to tunnel widening secondary to bone 
resorption.182
Failure of the muscle-tendon apparatus is rare, but when 
it does occur, it is secondary to enormous, quickly generated peripheral nerves and articular branches that arise from 
related muscle nerves. The definition of joint position and 
the detection of joint motion are monitored separately and 
through a combination of multiple inputs from different 
receptors in varied systems. Nerve endings in muscle  
and skin and in the joint capsule mediate the sensation of 
joint position and movement.153,154 Normal joints have 
afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor) innervations. Fast-
conducting, myelinated A fibers innervating the joint 
capsule are important for proprioception and detection of 
joint movement; slow-conducting, unmyelinated C fibers 
transmit diffuse pain sensation and regulate synovial micro -
vascular function.
Normal synovium is richly innervated by fine, unmyelin -
ated nerve fibers that follow the courses of blood vessels and 
extend into the synovial lining layers.148 These nerve fibers 
do not have specialized endings and are slow-conducting 
fibers; they may transmit diffuse, burning, or aching pain 
sensation. Sympathetic nerve fibers surround blood vessels, 
particularly in the deeper regions of normal synovium. They 
contain and release classic neurotransmitters, such as nor -
epinephrine, and neuropeptides that constrict synovial 
blood vessels. Neuropeptides that are markers of sensory 
nerves include substance P , calcitonin gene–related peptide, 
neuropeptide Y, and vasoactive intestinal peptide.148,155-157
Afferent nerves containing substance P also have an 
efferent role in the synovium. Substance P is released from 
peripheral nerve terminals into the joint, and specific, G 
protein–coupled receptors for substance P are localized to 
microvascular endothelium in normal synovium. Abnor -
malities of articular innervation that are associated with 
inflammatory arthritis may contribute to the failure of syno -
vial inflammation to resolve.148,158 Excessive local neuropep -
tide release may result in loss of nerve fibers owing to 
neuropeptide depletion. Synovial tissue proliferation 
without concomitant growth of new nerve fibers may lead 
to an apparent partial denervation of synovium.148,158 Studies 
in patients suggest that free nerve endings containing sub -
stance P may modulate inflammation and the pain pathway 
in osteoarthritis.159 Afferent nerve fibers from the joint play 
an important role in the reflex inhibition of muscle contrac -
tion. Trophic factors generated by motor neurons, such as 
the neuropeptide calcitonin gene–related peptide, are 
important in maintaining muscle bulk and a functional neu -
romuscular junction.160 Decreases in motor neuron trophic 
support during articular inflammation probably contribute 
to muscle wasting.
Mechanisms of joint pain have been reviewed in 
detail.161,162 In a noninflamed joint, most sensory nerve fibers 
do not respond to movement within the normal range; these 
are referred to as silent nociceptors.  In an acutely inflamed 
joint, however, these nerve fibers become sensitized by 
mediators, such as bradykinin, neurokinin 1, and prosta -
glandins (peripheral sensitization), such that normal move -
ments induce pain. Pain sensation is upregulated or 
downregulated further in the central nervous system, at the 
level of the spinal cord, and in the brain by central sensitiza -
tion and gating  of nociceptive input. Although the normal 
joint may respond predictably to painful stimuli, poor cor -
relation has been noted between apparent joint disease and 
perceived pain in chronic arthritis. Pain associated with 
joint movements within the normal range is a characteristic 12 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
between deep bursae and joints. In patients with rheuma -
toid arthritis, communications may exist between the sub -
acromial bursae and the glenohumeral joint, between the 
gastrocnemius or semimembranosus bursae and the knee 
joint, and between the iliopsoas bursa and the hip joint. It 
is unusual, however, for subcutaneous bursae, such as the 
prepatellar bursa or olecranon bursa, to develop communi -
cation with the underlying joint.192
Menisci
The meniscus, a fibrocartilaginous, wedge-shaped structure, 
is best developed in the knee, but also is found in the acro -
mioclavicular and sternoclavicular joints, the ulnocarpal 
joint, and the temporomandibular joint.193,194 Until recently, 
menisci were thought to have little function and a quiescent 
metabolism with no capability of repair, although early 
observations indicated that removal of menisci from the 
knee may lead to premature arthritic changes in the joint.195 
Evidence from an arthroscopic study of patients with ante -
rior cruciate ligament insufficiency indicates that the 
pathology of the medial meniscus correlates with that of the 
medial femoral cartilage.196 The meniscus is now considered 
to be an integral component of the knee joint that has 
important functions in joint stability, load distribution, 
shock absorption, and lubrication.193,194
The microanatomy of the meniscus is complex and age 
dependent.197 The characteristic shape of the lateral and 
medial menisci is achieved early in prenatal development. 
At that time, the menisci are cellular and highly vascular -
ized; with maturation, vascularity decreases progressively 
from the central margin to the peripheral margin. After 
skeletal maturity, the peripheral 10% to 30% of the menis -
cus remains highly vascularized by a circumferential capil -
lary plexus and is well innervated.198 Tears in this vascularized 
peripheral zone may undergo repair and remodeling.199 
The central portion of the mature meniscus is an avascular 
fibrocartilage, however, without nerves or lymphatics, con -
sisting of cells surrounded by an abundant extracellular 
matrix of collagens, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, 
and hyaluronic acid. Tears in this central zone heal poorly, 
if at all.
Collagen constitutes 60% to 70% of the dry weight of 
the meniscus and is mostly type I collagen, with lesser 
amounts of types III, V , and VI. A small quantity of cartilage-
specific type II collagen is localized to the inner, avascular 
portion of the meniscus. Collagen fibers in the periphery are 
mostly circumferentially oriented, with radial fibers extend -
ing toward the central portion.200-203 Elastin content is 
around 0.6%, and proteoglycan content is around 2% to 3% 
dry weight. Aggrecan and decorin are the major proteogly -
cans in the adult meniscus.204,205 Decorin is the predominant 
proteoglycan synthesized in the meniscus from young indi -
viduals, whereas the relative proportion of aggrecan synthe -
sis increases with age. Although the capacity of the meniscus 
to synthesize sulfated proteoglycans decreases after the 
teenage years, age-related increases in expression of decorin 
and aggrecan mRNA suggest that the resident cells are able 
to respond quickly to alterations in the biomechanical 
environment.206
The meniscus was defined originally as a fibrocartilage, 
based on the rounded or oval shape of most of the cells and forces across a joint and usually occurs near the tendon 
insertion into bone.183,184 Factors that may predispose to 
tendon failure consist of aging processes, including loss of 
extracellular water and an increase in intermolecular cross-
links of collagen; tendon ischemia; iatrogenic factors, 
including injection of glucocorticoids; and deposition of 
calcium hydroxyapatite crystals within the collagen bundles. 
Alterations in collagen fibril composition and structure are 
associated with tendon degeneration during aging and may 
predispose to osteoarthritis.179,185 Evidence indicates that 
BMPs promote tendon repair if osteogenic signaling is 
impaired.186
Ligaments
Ligaments provide a stabilizing bridge between bones, per -
mitting a limited range of movement.187 The ligaments 
often are recognized only as hypertrophied components of 
the fibrous joint capsule and are structurally similar to 
tendons.188 Although the fibers are oriented parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of both tissues,164 the collagen fibrils in 
ligaments are nonparallel and arranged in fibers that are 
oriented roughly along the long axis in a wavy, undulating 
pattern, or crimp,  which can straighten in response to load. 
Some ligaments have a higher ratio of elastin to collagen 
(1 : 4) than tendons (1 : 50), which permits a greater degree 
of stretch. Ligaments also have larger quantities of reducible 
cross-links, more type III collagen, slightly less total colla -
gen, and more glycosaminoglycans compared with tendons. 
The cells in ligaments seem to be more metabolically active 
than those in tendons and have more plump cellular nuclei 
and higher DNA content.
During postnatal growth, the development of ligament 
attachment zones involves changes in the ratios and distri -
bution of collagen types I, III, and V and the synthesis of 
type II collagen and proteoglycans by fibrochondrocytes 
that develop from ligament cells at the attachment 
zone.189,190 Attachment zones are believed to permit gradual 
transmission of the tensile force between ligament and 
bone.
Ligaments play a major role in the passive stabilization 
of joints, aided by the capsule and, when present, menisci. 
In the knee, the collateral and cruciate ligaments provide 
stability when there is little or no load on the joint. As 
compressive load increases, the contribution to stability 
from the joint surfaces themselves and the surrounding mus -
culature increases as well. Injured ligaments generally heal, 
and structural integrity is restored by contracture of the 
healing ligament so that it can act again as a stabilizer of 
the joint.191
Bursae
The many bursae in the human body facilitate gliding of 
one tissue over another, much as a tendon sheath facilitates 
movement of its tendon. Bursae are closed sacs, lined 
sparsely with mesenchymal cells similar to synovial cells, 
but they are generally less well vascularized than synovium. 
Most bursae differentiate concurrently with synovial joints 
during embryogenesis. During life, however, trauma or 
inflammation may lead to the development of new bursae, 
hypertrophy of previously existing ones, or communication 13 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
Table 1-1  Extracellular matrix Components of 
Articular Cartilage*
Collagens
Type II
Type IX
Type XI
Type VI
Types XII, XIV
Type X (hypertrophic chondrocyte)
Proteoglycans
Aggrecan
Versican
link protein
Biglycan (DS-PgI)
Decorin (DS-PgII)
Epiphycan (DS-PgIII)
Fibromodulin
lumican
Proline/arginine-rich and leucine-rich repeat protein (PRElP)
Chondroadherin
Perlecan
lubricin (SZP)
Other Noncollagenous Proteins (Structural)
Cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COmP) or thrombospondin-5
Thrombospondin-1 and thrombospondin-3
Cartilage matrix protein (matrilin-1) and matrilin-3
Fibronectin
Tenascin-C
Cartilage intermediate layer protein (CIlP)
Fibrillin
Elastin
Other Noncollagenous Proteins (Regulatory)
glycoprotein (gp)-39, yKl-40
matrix gla protein (mgP)
Chondromodulin-I (SCgP) and chondromodulin-II
Cartilage-derived retinoic acid–sensitive protein (CD-RAP)
growth factors
Cell Membrane–Associated Proteins
Integrins ( α1β1, α2β1, α3β1, α5β1, α6β1, α10β1, αvβ3, αvβ5)
Anchorin CII (annexin V)
Cell determinant 44 (CD44)
Syndecan-1, -3, and -4
Discoidin domain receptor 2
*The collagens, proteoglycans, and other noncollagenous proteins in the 
cartilage matrix are synthesized by chondrocytes at different stages during 
development and growth of cartilage. In mature articular cartilage, proteo -
glycans and other noncollagen proteins are turned over slowly, whereas the 
collagen network is stable unless exposed to proteolytic cleavage. Proteins 
that are associated with chondrocyte cell membranes also are listed because 
they permit specific interactions with extracellular matrix proteins. The spe -
cific structure-function relationships are discussed in Chapter 3 and are 
described in Table 3-1.the fibrous microscopic appearance of the extracellular 
matrix.207 Based on molecular and spatial criteria, three 
distinct populations of cells are recognized in the meniscus 
of the knee joint201:
1. The fibrochondrocyte is the most abundant cell in the 
middle and inner meniscus, synthesizing primarily 
type I collagen and relatively small amounts of type 
II and III collagen. It is round or oval in shape and 
has a pericellular filamentous matrix containing type 
VI collagen.
2. The fibroblast-like cells lack a pericellular matrix and 
are located in the outer portion of the meniscus. They 
are distinguished by long, thin, branching cytoplasmic 
projections that stain for vimentin. They make contact 
with other cells in different regions via connexin 
43–containing gap junctions. The presence of two 
centrosomes, one associated with a primary celium, 
suggests a sensory, rather than motile, function that 
could enable the cells to respond to circumferential 
tensile loads, rather than compressive loads.208
3. The superficial zone cells have a characteristic fusi -
form shape with no cytoplasmic projections. Occa -
sional staining of these cells in the uninjured meniscus 
with α-actin and their migration into surrounding 
wound sites suggest that they are specialized progeni -
tor cells that may participate in a remodeling response 
in the meniscus and surrounding tissues.209, 210
MATURE ARTICULAR CARTILAGE
Articular cartilage is a specialized connective tissue that 
covers the weight-bearing surfaces of diarthrodial joints.119,211 
The principal functions of cartilage layers covering bone 
ends are to permit low-friction, high-velocity movement 
between bones, to absorb transmitted forces associated  
with locomotion, and to contribute to joint stability. Lubri -
cation by synovial fluid provides frictionless movement  
of the articulating cartilage surfaces. Chondrocytes (see 
Chapter 3) are the single cellular components of adult 
hyaline articular cartilage and are responsible for synthesiz -
ing and maintaining the highly specialized cartilage matrix 
macromolecules. The cartilage extracellular matrix is com -
posed of an extensive network of collagen fibrils, which 
confers tensile strength, and an interlocking mesh of pro -
teoglycans, which provides compressive stiffness through 
the ability to absorb and extrude water. Numerous other 
noncollagenous proteins also contribute to the unique prop -
erties of cartilage ( Table 1-1 ). Histologically, the tissue 
appears to be fairly homogeneous and is clearly distinguished 
from calcified cartilage and underlying subchondral bone 
(Figure 1-7 ). The organization of articular cartilage and the 
structure-function relationships of cartilage matrix compo -
nents are described in Chapter 3.
Subchondral Bone Interactions with Articular 
Cartilage
Subchondral bone is not a homogeneous tissue; it consists 
of a layer of compact cortical bone and an underlying system 
of cancellous bone organized into a trabecular network.212,213 
The subchondral bone is separated from the overlying artic -
ular cartilage by a thin zone of calcified cartilage. The so-called tidemark defines the transition zone between 
articular and calcified cartilage. This complex biocomposite 
of bone and calcified cartilage provides an optimal system 
for distributing loads that are transmitted from the weight-
bearing surfaces lined by hyaline articular cartilage. 
Although the tidemark was originally believed to form a 
barrier to fluid flow, evidence suggests that biologically 
active molecules can transit this zone, providing a mecha -
nism by which products produced by chondrocytes or bone 
cells can influence the activity of the other cell type.214 DS-PG, dermatan sulfate proteoglycan; SCGP, small cartilage–derived  
glycoprotein; SZP, superficial zone protein; YKL-40, 40KD chitinase 3-like 
glycoprotein.14 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
the articular cartilage and periarticular bone may lead to 
modification of the contours of adjacent articulating sur -
faces, further contributing to the adverse biomechanical 
environment.217,223-225
Analyses of periarticular bone in patients with osteoar -
thritis reveal that the structural and functional properties 
of subchondral cortical and trabecular bone are dependent 
on the stage of osteoarthritis progression.226 Several studies 
have investigated therapies that target bone remodeling to 
prevent these changes. Examples include the use of calcito -
nin,227,228 bisphosphonates,229 and estrogen.230 To date, no 
study has been performed in patients with osteoarthritis to 
investigate the efficacy of targeting receptor activator of 
nuclear factor κB (NF κB) ligand (RANKL), which medi -
ates osteoclast differentiation and activity, and its receptor 
RANK, a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor 
family. RANK is expressed in adult articular chondrocytes, 
but exogenous RANKL does not activate NF κB nor stimu -
late the production of collagenase or nitric oxide.231 Inhibi -
tion of RANKL expression does not block cartilage 
destruction in inflammatory models,232 although RANKL 
may have indirect effects on cartilage through its protective 
effect on bone.233
SYNOVIAL FLUID AND NUTRITION  
OF JOINT STRUCTURES
The volume and composition of synovial fluid are deter -
mined by the properties of the synovium and its vasculature. 
Fluid in normal joints is present in small quantities (2.5 mL 
in the normal knee) sufficient to coat the synovial surface, 
but not to separate one surface from the other. Tendon Under physiologic conditions, the composition and struc -
tural organization of subchondral bone and calcified carti -
lage are optimally adapted to transfer loads, but multiple 
conditions can lead to changes in the structural and func -
tional properties of these tissues. For example, with advanc -
ing age, the zone of calcified cartilage may expand and 
advance into the deep zones of the overlying articular car -
tilage, producing thinning of the cartilage layer and altera -
tions in load transfer and fibrillation and disruption of the 
cartilage surface.215
Maintenance of the structural and functional integrity  
of articular cartilage and subchondral bone under physio -
logic loading provides evidence of the unique and intimate 
interaction of these tissues, but there remains controversy 
regarding the relationship between them in the pathogen -
esis of osteoarthritis.216 Radin and Rose217 proposed that the 
initiation of early alterations in articular cartilage is caused 
by an increase in subchondral bone stiffness that adversely 
affects the function of articular chondrocytes, leading to 
deterioration in the properties of the articular cartilage and 
susceptibility to mechanical disruption. Alternatively, it has 
been proposed that changes in subchondral bone stiffness 
may be secondary to cartilage deterioration.218-220 The alter -
ations in subchondral bone and cartilage that accompany 
the osteoarthritis process are not restricted to these tissues, 
but also affect the zone of calcified cartilage, where evidence 
reveals vascular invasion, advancement of the calcified car -
tilage, and duplication of the tidemark, which contributes 
further to a decrease in articular cartilage thickness.221 A 
more recent study showed that angiogenesis in the osteo -
chondral junction is independent of synovial angiogenesis 
and synovitis, but is associated with cartilage changes and 
clinical disease activity.222 These structural alterations in Figure 1-7  Representative sections of normal human adult articular cartilage show nearly the same field in plain (A) and polarized (B) light. Note 
the clear demarcation of the articular cartilage from the calcified cartilage below the tidemark and the underlying subchondral bone. (Hematoxylin-
eosin stain; original magnification ×60.) (Courtesy Edward F. DiCarlo, MD, Pathology Department, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York.)
B A15 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
normal knees), and equilibrium is not usually reached 
among all parts of the joint. Tissue fluid around fenestrated 
endothelium reflects plasma ultrafiltrate most closely, with 
a low content of hyaluronate compared with synovial fluid. 
Alternatively, locally generated or released peptides, such 
as endothelin and substance P , may attain much higher 
perivascular concentrations than those measured in syno -
vial fluid. The turnover time for hyaluronan in the normal 
joint (13 hours) is an order of magnitude slower, however, 
than that for small solutes and proteins. Association with 
hyaluronan may result in trapping of solutes within synovial 
fluid.239
In normal joints, intra-articular pressures are slightly sub -
atmospheric at rest (0 to −5 mm Hg).240 During exercise, 
hydrostatic pressure in the normal joint may decrease 
further. Resting intra-articular pressures in rheumatoid 
joints are around 20 mm Hg, whereas during isometric exer -
cise, they may increase to greater than 100 mm Hg—well 
above capillary perfusion pressure and, at times, above arte -
rial pressure. Repeated mechanical stresses can interrupt 
synovial perfusion during joint movement, particularly in 
the presence of a synovial effusion.
Synovial Fluid as an Indicator of Joint Function
In the absence of a basement membrane separating synovium 
or cartilage from synovial fluid, measurements made on 
synovial fluid may reflect the activity of these structures. A sheath fluid and synovial fluid are biochemically similar. 
Both are essential for the nutrition and lubrication of  
adjacent avascular structures, including tendon and articu -
lar cartilage, and for limiting adhesion formation and main -
taining movement. Characterization and measurement of 
synovial fluid constituents have proved useful for the iden -
tification of locally generated regulatory factors, markers of 
cartilage turnover, and the metabolic status of the joint, and 
for assessment of the effects of therapy on cartilage homeo -
stasis. Interpretation of such data requires, however, an 
understanding of the generation and clearance of synovial 
fluid and its various components.
Generation and Clearance of Synovial Fluid
Synovial fluid concentrations of a protein represent the net 
contributions of synovial blood flow, plasma concentration, 
microvascular permeability, and lymphatic removal and its 
production and consumption within the joint space. Syno -
vial fluid is a mixture of a protein-rich ultrafiltrate of plasma 
and hyaluronan synthesized by synoviocytes. Generation of 
this ultrafiltrate depends on the difference between intra -
capillary and intra-articular hydrostatic pressures and 
between colloid osmotic pressures of capillary plasma and 
synovial tissue fluid. Fenestrations, small pores covered by 
a thin membrane, in the synovial capillaries and the mac -
romolecular sieve of hyaluronic acid facilitate rapid 
exchange of small molecules, such as glucose and lactate, 
assisted—in the case of glucose—by an active transport 
system.234 Proteins are present in synovial fluid at concen -
trations inversely proportional to molecular size, with syno -
vial fluid albumin concentrations being about 45% of those 
in plasma ( Figure 1-8 ).235 Concentrations of electrolytes and 
small molecules are equivalent to those in plasma.236
Synovial fluid is cleared through lymphatics in the 
synovium, assisted by joint movement. In contrast to ultra -
filtration, lymphatic clearance of solutes is independent of 
molecular size. In addition, constituents of synovial fluid, 
such as regulatory peptides, may be degraded locally by 
enzymes, and low-molecular-weight metabolites may diffuse 
along concentration gradients into plasma. The kinetics of 
delivery and removal of a protein must be determined (e.g., 
using albumin as a reference solute) to assess the signifi -
cance of its concentration in the joint.237
Hyaluronic acid is synthesized by fibroblast-like synovial 
lining cells, and it appears in high concentrations in syno -
vial fluid, at around 3 g/L, compared with a plasma concen -
tration of 30 µg/L. Lubricin, a glycoprotein that assists 
articular lubrication, is another constituent of synovial fluid 
that is generated by the lining cells. It is now believed that 
hyaluronan functions in fluid-film lubrication, whereas 
lubricin is the true boundary lubricant in synovial fluid (see 
following). Because the volume of synovial fluid is deter -
mined by the amount of hyaluronan, water retention seems 
to be the major function of this large molecule.234,238
Despite the absence of a basement membrane, synovial 
fluid does not mix freely with extracellular synovial tissue 
fluid. Hyaluronan may trap molecules within the synovial 
cavity by acting as a filtration screen on the surface of the 
synovial lining, resisting the movement of synovial fluid out 
from the joint space.238 Synovial fluid and its constituent 
proteins have a rapid turnover time (around 1 hour in Figure 1-8  Ratio of the concentration of proteins in synovial fluid to 
that found in serum, plotted as a function of molecular weight. larger 
proteins are selectively excluded from normal synovial fluid, but this 
macromolecular sieve is less effective in diseased synovium. Conc., con -
centration; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; S, serum; SF, synovial fluid. (From 
Kushner I, Somerville JA: Permeability of human synovial membrane to 
plasma proteins, Arthritis Rheum 14:560, 1971. Reprinted with permission 
of the American College of Rheumatology.)NormalOsteoarthritis
Classic RAGoutProbably RA
100 1 1000Oroso-
mucoidTrans-
 ferrinCerulo-
plasminα2 Macro-
globulin
.01.101.0
Molecular W eight  (×103)Ratio
SF
S
Conc.
44 74 160 82016 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Lubrication and Nutrition of the Articular 
Cartilage
Lubrication
Synovial fluid serves as a lubricant for articular cartilage and 
as a source of nutrition for the chondrocytes within. Lubri -
cation is essential for protecting cartilage and other joint 
structures from friction and shear stresses associated with 
movement under loading. T wo basic categories of joint 
lubrication are known. In fluid-film lubrication, cartilage 
surfaces are separated by an incompressible fluid film; hyal -
uronan functions as the lubricant. In boundary lubrication, 
specialized molecules attached to the cartilage surface 
permit surface-to-surface contact, while decreasing the coef -
ficient of friction.
During loading, a noncompressible fluid film trapped 
between opposing cartilage surfaces prevents the surfaces 
from touching. Irregularities in the cartilage surface and its 
deformation during compression may augment this trapping 
of fluid. This stable film is approximately 0.1 µm thick in 
the normal human hip joint, but it can be much thinner in 
the presence of inflammatory synovial fluids or with 
increased cartilage porosity.244, 245
Lubricin is the major boundary lubricant in the human 
joint.246 It is a glycoprotein, also called superficial zone protein  
or proteoglycan 4,  that is synthesized by synovial cells and 
chondrocytes.247-250 Recent studies have demonstrated that 
lubricin is also produced by meniscal and tendon cells.251,252 
It has a molecular weight of 225,000, a length of 200 nm, 
and a diameter of 1 to 2 nm.253 Dipalmitoyl phosphatidyl -
choline, which constitutes 45% of the lipid in normal syno -
vial fluid, acts together with lubricin as a boundary 
lubricant.254 More recent work indicates that lubricin func -
tions as a phospholipid carrier via a mechanism that is 
common to all tissues.255,256 In cartilage, lipid composes 1% 
to 2% of the dry weight,257 and experimental treatment of 
cartilage surfaces with fat solvents impairs lubrication 
qualities.258
Nutrition
As observed by Hunter in 1743,259 normal adult articular 
cartilage contains no blood vessels. Vascularization of car -
tilage would be expected to alter its mechanical properties. 
Blood flow would be repeatedly occluded during weight 
bearing and exercise, with reactive oxygen species gener -
ated during reperfusion, resulting in repeated damage to 
cartilage matrix and chondrocytes. Chondrocytes synthesize 
specific inhibitors of angiogenesis that maintain articular 
cartilage as an avascular tissue.260-262 As a result of the lack 
of adjacent blood vessels, the chondrocyte normally lives in 
an hypoxic and acidotic environment, with extracellular 
fluid pH values around 7.1 to 7.2,263 and it uses anaerobic 
glycolysis for energy production.264,265 High lactate levels in 
normal synovial fluid, compared with paired plasma mea -
surements, partially reflect this anaerobic metabolism.265 
There are two sources of nutrients for articular cartilage: 
synovial fluid and subchondral blood vessels.
The synovial fluid and, indirectly, the synovial lining, 
through which synovial fluid is generated, are the major 
sources of nutrients for articular cartilage. Nutrients may wide range of regulatory factors and products of synoviocyte 
metabolism and cartilage breakdown may be generated 
locally within the joint, resulting in marked differences 
between the composition of synovial fluid and that of 
plasma ultrafiltrate. Because there is little capacity for the 
selective concentration of solutes in synovial fluid, solutes 
present at higher concentrations than in plasma are prob -
ably synthesized locally. It is necessary to know the local 
clearance rate, however, to determine whether solutes 
present in synovial fluid at lower concentrations than in 
plasma are generated locally.236 Although microvascular 
permeability to protein in highly inflamed rheumatoid 
joints is more than twice that in osteoarthritic joints, syno -
vial fluid protein concentrations vary little between the two 
joint diseases241 because enhanced entry of proteins through 
the microvasculature is largely offset by the increased lym -
phatic clearance.242 Because clearance rates from synovial 
fluid may be slower than those from plasma, however, syno -
vial fluid levels of drugs or urate may remain elevated after 
plasma levels have declined.234
Comparisons of synovial fluid constituents between 
disease groups are often limited by the sparseness of data on 
normal synovial fluid as a result of difficulties in its collec -
tion. Extrapolation from synovial fluid concentrations to 
local synthetic rates is complicated further by variations in 
clearance rates and in synovial fluid volume. Plasma pro -
teins are less effectively filtered in inflamed synovium, 
perhaps because of the increased size of endothelial cell 
fenestrations, or because interstitial hyaluronate-protein 
complexes are fragmented by enzymes associated with the 
inflammatory process.235 Concentrations of proteins, such as 
α2-macroglobulin (the principal proteinase inhibitor of 
plasma), fibrinogen, and IgM, are elevated in inflammatory 
synovial fluids (see Figure 1-8 ), as are associated protein-
bound cations. Membrane peptidases may limit the diffu -
sion of regulatory peptides from their sites of release into 
synovial fluid. In inflammatory arthritis, fibrin deposits may 
retard flow between tissue and liquid phases. Cautious inter -
pretation of synovial fluid analysis has important implica -
tions in understanding how to use data on biomarkers of 
cartilage damage and repair in rheumatoid arthritis and 
osteoarthritis (see Chapter 53).
Recently, Gobezie and co-workers243 have utilized high-
throughput mass spectroscopy–based proteomic analysis to 
define the protein expression profiles of high-abundance 
synovial fluid proteins in healthy subjects and patients with 
early and late osteoarthritis. They identified 18 proteins 
that were significantly differentially expressed between 
osteoarthritic and control groups. Although all of the dif -
ferentially expressed proteins are present in the blood and 
could therefore enter the joint through alterations in vas -
cular permeability associated with the disease state, these 
molecules are also products of synovial cells and chondro -
cytes, suggesting that they could be locally produced within 
the joint. Proteins associated with oxidative damage and 
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases were among 
the high-abundance molecules in osteoarthritis synovial 
fluids. Members of the proinflammatory complement cascade 
were also identified in the synovial fluid. Of interest, these 
molecules have been implicated in the pathophysiology of 
both osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.17 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
collagens, proteoglycans, and other noncollagenous pro -
teins, which provide tensile strength and compressive resis -
tance. Proper distribution and relative composition of these 
proteins are required for the function of cartilage in protect -
ing the subchondral bone from adverse environmental 
influences.
Maintenance of the unique composition and organiza -
tion of each joint tissue is crucial for normal joint function, 
which is compromised in response to inflammation, biome -
chanical injury, and aging. Knowledge of normal structure-
function relationships within joint tissues is essential for 
understanding the pathogenesis and consequences of joint 
disease.
Selected References
1. Simkin PA: The musculoskeletal system. A. Joints. In Klippel JH, 
Crofford LJ, Stone JH, Weyand CM, editors: Primer on the rheumatic 
diseases , ed 12, Atlanta, 2001, Arthritis Foundation, pp 5–9.
2. Olsen BR, Reginato AM, Wang W: Bone development, Annu Rev 
Cell Dev Biol  16:191–220, 2000.
3. O’Rahilly R, Gardner E: The timing and sequence of events in the 
development of the limbs in the human embryo, Anat Embryol (Berl)  
148:1–23, 1975.
4. O’Rahilly R, Gardner E: The embryology of movable joints. In Sokol -
off L, editor: The joints and synovial fluid , vol 1, New York, 1978, 
Academic Press, p 49.
5. Pacifici M, Koyama E, Iwamoto M: Mechanisms of synovial joint and 
articular cartilage formation: recent advances, but many lingering 
mysteries, Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today  75:237–248, 2005.
6. Church VL, Francis-West P: Wnt signalling during limb develop -
ment, Int J Dev Biol  46:927–936, 2002.
7. Francis-West PH, Abdelfattah A, Chen P , et al: Mechanisms of 
GDF-5 action during skeletal development, Development  126:1305–
1315, 1999.
8. Edwards CJ, Francis-West PH: Bone morphogenetic proteins in the 
development and healing of synovial joints, Semin Arthritis Rheum  
31:33–42, 2001.
9. Xu X, Weinstein M, Li C, Deng C-X: Fibroblast growth factor recep -
tors (FGFRs) and their roles in limb development, Cell Tissue Res  
296:33–43, 1999.
10. Minina E, Kreschel C, Naski MC, et al: Interaction of FGF , Ihh/
Pthlh, and BMP signaling integrates chondrocyte proliferation and 
hypertrophic differentiation, Dev Cell  3:439–449, 2002.
11. Iwamoto M, Tamamura Y, Koyama E, et al: Transcription factor ERG 
and joint and articular cartilage formation during mouse limb and 
spine skeletogenesis, Dev Biol  305:40–51, 2007.
12. Lizarraga G, Lichtler A, Upholt WB, Kosher RA: Studies on the role 
of Cux1 in regulation of the onset of joint formation in the develop -
ing limb, Dev Biol  243:44–54, 2002.
13. Hartmann C, Tabin CJ: Wnt-14 plays a pivotal role in inducing 
synovial joint formation in the developing appendicular skeleton, 
Cell 104:341–351, 2001.
14. Tsumaki N, Tanaka K, Arikawa-Hirasawa E, et al: Role of CDMP-1 
in skeletal morphogenesis: promotion of mesenchymal cell recruit -
ment and chondrocyte differentiation, J Cell Biol  144:161–173, 1999.
15. Archer CW, Dowthwaite GP , Francis-West P: Development of syno -
vial joints, Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today  69:144–155, 2003.
16. Storm EE, Kingsley DM: GDF5 coordinates bone and joint formation 
during digit development, Dev Biol  209:11–27, 1999.
17. von der Mark H, von der Mark K, Gay S: Study of differential col -
lagen synthesis during development of the chick embryo by immu -
nofluorescence. I. Preparation of collagen type I and type II specific 
antibodies and their application to early stages of the chick embryo, 
Dev Biol  48:237–249, 1976.
18. Craig FM, Bentley G, Archer CW: The spatial and temporal pattern 
of collagens I and II and keratan sulphate in the developing chick 
metatarsophalangeal joint, Development  99:383–391, 1987.
19. Morrison EH, Ferguson MW, Bayliss MT, Archer CW: The develop -
ment of articular cartilage. I. The spatial and temporal patterns of 
collagen types, J Anat  189(Pt 1):9–22, 1996.enter cartilage from synovial fluid by diffusion or by mass 
transport of fluid during compression-relaxation cycles.266 
Molecules as large as hemoglobin (65 kD) can diffuse 
through normal articular cartilage,267 and the solutes needed 
for cellular metabolism are much smaller. Diffusion of 
uncharged small solutes, such as glucose, is not impaired in 
matrices containing large quantities of glycosaminoglycans, 
and the diffusivity of small molecules through hyaluronate 
is enhanced.268,269
Intermittent compression may serve as a pump mecha -
nism for solute exchange in cartilage. The concept has 
arisen from observations that joint immobilization or dislo -
cation leads to degenerative changes. In contrast, exercise 
increases solute penetration into cartilage in experimental 
systems.267 During weight bearing, fluid escapes from the 
load-bearing region by flow to other cartilage sites. When 
the load is removed, cartilage re-expands and draws back 
fluid, exchanging nutrients with waste materials.270
In a growing child, the deeper layers of cartilage are 
vascularized, such that blood vessels penetrate between 
columns of chondrocytes in the growth plate. It is likely that 
nutrients diffuse from these tiny end capillaries through the 
matrix to chondrocytes. Diffusion from subchondral blood 
vessels is not considered a major route for the nutrition of 
normal adult articular cartilage because of the barrier pro -
vided by its densely calcified lower layer. Nonetheless, 
partial defects may normally exist in this barrier,271 and in 
arthritis, neovascularization of the deeper layers of articular 
cartilage may contribute to cartilage nutrition and to entry 
of inflammatory cells and cytokines.221,272 In aging and 
osteoarthritis, tidemark “duplication” may indicate com -
munication between bone and cartilage.218,273 Experimental 
studies have indicated that cartilage lesions of chondroma -
lacia may develop if the subchondral blood supply of the 
patella is compromised.274
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Normal human synovial joints are complex structures that 
comprise interacting connective tissue elements that permit 
constrained and low-friction movement of adjacent bones. 
The development of synovial joints in the embryo is a 
highly ordered process involving complex cell-cell and cell-
matrix interactions, leading to the formation of cartilage 
anlagen and interzone and joint cavitation. Understanding 
of the cellular interactions and molecular factors involved 
in cartilage morphogenesis and limb development has pro -
vided clues to understanding the functions of the synovium, 
articular cartilage, and associated structures in the mature 
joint.
The synovial joint is uniquely adapted to responding to 
environmental and mechanical demands. The synovial 
lining is composed of two to three cell layers, and no base -
ment membrane separates the lining cells from underlying 
connective tissue. The synovium produces synovial fluid, 
which provides nutrition and lubrication to the avascular 
articular cartilage. Normal articular cartilage contains a 
single cell type, the articular chondrocyte, which is respon -
sible for maintaining the integrity of the extracellular car -
tilage matrix. This matrix consists of a complex network of 18 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
49. Riddle RD, Tabin C: How limbs develop, Sci Am  280:74–79, 1999.
50. Bitgood MJ, McMahon AP: Hedgehog and Bmp genes are coex -
pressed at many diverse sites of cell-cell interaction in the mouse 
embryo, Dev Biol  172:126–138, 1995.
51. Roberts DJ, Johnson RL, Burke AC, et al: Sonic hedgehog is an 
endodermal signal inducing Bmp-4 and Hox genes during induction 
and regionalization of the chick hindgut, Development  121:3163–
3174, 1995.
52. Liu A, Wang B, Niswander LA: Mouse intraflagellar transport pro -
teins regulate both the activator and repressor functions of Gli tran -
scription factors, Development  132:3103–3111, 2005.
53. Parr BA, McMahon AP: Dorsalizing signal Wnt-7a required for 
normal polarity of D-V and A-P axes of mouse limb, Nature  374:350–
353, 1995.
54. Irvine KD, Vogt TF: Dorsal-ventral signalling in limb development, 
Curr Opin Cell Biol  8:867–876, 1997.
55. Pizette S, Niswander L: BMPs are required at two steps of limb chon -
drogenesis: formation of prechondrogenic condensations and their 
differentiation into chondrocytes, Dev Biol  219:237–249, 2000.
56. Derynck R, Zhang YE: Smad-dependent and Smad-independent 
pathways in TGF-beta family signalling, Nature  425:577–584, 2003.
57. Yoon BS, Lyons KM: Multiple functions of BMPs in chondrogenesis, 
J Cell Biochem  93:93–103, 2004.
58. Yoon BS, Ovchinnikov DA, Yoshii I, et al: Bmpr1a and Bmpr1b have 
overlapping functions and are essential for chondrogenesis in vivo, 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  102:5062–5067, 2005.
59. Ng LJ, Wheatley S, Muscat GE, et al: SOX9 binds DNA, activates 
transcription, and coexpresses with type II collagen during chondro -
genesis in the mouse, Dev Biol  183:108–121, 1997.
60. Lefebvre V , Huang W, Harley VR, et al: SOX9 is a potent activator 
of the chondrocyte-specific enhancer of the pro alpha1(II) collagen 
gene, Mol Cell Biol  17:2336–2346, 1997.
61. Lefebvre V , Li P , de Crombrugghe B: A new long form of Sox5 
(L-Sox5), Sox6 and Sox9 are coexpressed in chondrogenesis and 
cooperatively activate the type II collagen gene, EMBO J  17:5718–
5733, 1998.
62. Smits P , Li P , Mandel J, et al: The transcription factors L-Sox5 and 
Sox6 are essential for cartilage formation, Dev Cell  1:277–290, 2001.
63. Ducy P , Zhang R, Geoffroy V , et al: Osf2/Cbfa1: a transcriptional 
activator of osteoblast differentiation, Cell 89:747–754, 1997.
64. Otto F , Thornell AP , Crompton T, et al: Cbfa1, a candidate gene for 
cleidocranial dysplasia syndrome, is essential for osteoblast differen -
tiation and bone development, Cell 89:765–771, 1997.
65. Xu SC, Harris MA, Rubenstein JLR, et al: Bone morphogenetic 
protein-2 (BMP-2) signaling to the Col2a1  gene in chondroblasts 
requires the homeobox gene Dlx-2 , DNA Cell Biol  20:359–365, 2001.
66. Itoh N, Ornitz DM: Evolution of the Fgf and Fgfr gene families, 
Trends Genet  20:563–569, 2004.
67. Ornitz DM: FGF signaling in the developing endochondral skeleton, 
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev  16:205–213, 2005.
68. Beier F: Cell-cycle control and the cartilage growth plate, J Cell 
Physiol  202:1–8, 2005.
69. Sahni M, Ambrosetti DC, Mansukhani A, et al: FGF signaling inhib -
its chondrocyte proliferation and regulates bone development 
through the STAT-1 pathway, Genes Dev  13:1361–1366, 1999.
70. Liu Z, Xu J, Colvin JS, Ornitz DM: Coordination of chondrogenesis 
and osteogenesis by fibroblast growth factor 18, Genes Dev  16:859–
869, 2002.
71. Ohbayashi N, Shibayama M, Kurotaki Y, et al: FGF18 is required for 
normal cell proliferation and differentiation during osteogenesis and 
chondrogenesis, Genes Dev  16:870–879, 2002.
72. Kronenberg HM: PTHrP and skeletal development, Ann N Y Acad 
Sci 1068:1–13, 2006.
73. McMahon AP , Ingham PW, Tabin CJ: Developmental roles and 
clinical significance of hedgehog signaling, Curr Top Dev Biol  53:1–
114, 2003.
74. Vortkamp A, Lee K, Lanske B, et al: Regulation of rate of cartilage 
differentiation by Indian hedgehog and PTH-related protein, Science  
273:613–622, 1996.
75. Lanske B, Karaplis AC, Lee K, et al: PTH/PTHrP receptor in early 
development and Indian hedgehog-regulated bone growth, Science  
273:663–666, 1996.
76. Kobayashi T, Soegiarto DW, Yang Y, et al: Indian hedgehog stimu -
lates periarticular chondrocyte differentiation to regulate growth 
plate length independently of PTHrP , J Clin Invest  115:1734–1742, 
2005.20. Pitsillides AA, Archer CW, Prehm P , et al: Alterations in hyaluronan 
synthesis during developing joint cavitation, J Histochem Cytochem  
43:263–273, 1995.
21. Murphy JM, Heinegard R, McIntosh A, et al: Distribution of cartilage 
molecules in the developing mouse joint, Matrix Biol  18:487–497, 
1999.
22. Mundlos S, Olsen BR: Heritable diseases of the skeleton. Part II. 
Molecular insights into skeletal development-matrix components 
and their homeostasis, FASEB J  11:227–233, 1997.
23. Kavanagh E, Ashhurst DE: Development and aging of the articular 
cartilage of the rabbit knee joint: distribution of biglycan, decorin, 
and matrilin-1, J Histochem Cytochem  47:1603–1616, 1999.
24. Nalin AM, Greenlee TK Jr, Sandell LJ: Collagen gene expression 
during development of avian synovial joints: transient expression of 
types II and XI collagen genes in the joint capsule, Dev Dyn  203:352–
362, 1995.
25. Ito MM, Kida MY: Morphological and biochemical re-evaluation of 
the process of cavitation in the rat knee joint: cellular and cell strata 
alterations in the interzone, J Anat  197(Pt 4):659–679, 2000.
26. Mitrovic D: Development of the diarthrodial joints in the rat embryo, 
Am J Anat  151:475–485, 1978.
27. Kimura S, Shiota K: Sequential changes of programmed cell death 
in developing fetal mouse limbs and its possible roles in limb mor -
phogenesis, J Morphol  229:337–346, 1996.
28. Colnot CI, Helms JA: A molecular analysis of matrix remodeling and 
angiogenesis during long bone development, Mech Dev  100:245–250, 
2001.
29. Roach HI, Clarke NM: Physiological cell death of chondrocytes in 
vivo is not confined to apoptosis: new observations on the mamma -
lian growth plate, J Bone Joint Surg Br  82:601–613, 2000.
30. Edwards JCW, Wilkinson LS, Jones HM, et al: The formation of 
human synovial joint cavities: a possible role for hyaluronan and 
CD44 in altered interzone cohesion, J Anat  185(Pt 2):355–367, 1994.
31. Drachman DB, Sokoloff L: The role of movement in embryonic joint 
development, Dev Biol  14:401, 1966.
32. Persson M: The role of movements in the development of sutural and 
diarthrodial joints tested by long-term paralysis of chick embryos,  
J Anat  137(Pt 3):591–599, 1983.
33. Fell HB: The histogenesis of cartilage and bone in the long bones of 
the embryonic fowl, J Morphol Physiol  40:417–459, 1925.
34. Hall BK, Miyake T: All for one and one for all: condensations and 
the initiation of skeletal development, Bioessays  22:138–147, 2000.
35. Sandell LJ, Nalin AM, Reife RA: Alternative splice form of type II 
procollagen mRNA (IIA) is predominant in skeletal precursors and 
non-cartilaginous tissues during early mouse development, Dev Dyn  
199:129–140, 1994.
36. DeLise AM, Fischer L, Tuan RS: Cellular interactions and signaling 
in cartilage development, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  8:309–334, 2000.
37. Eames BF , de la Fuente L, Helms JA: Molecular ontogeny of the 
skeleton, Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today  69:93–101, 2003.
38. Tuan RS: Biology of developmental and regenerative skeletogenesis, 
Clin Orthop Relat Res  (427):S105–S117, 2004.
39. Zwilling E: Limb morphogenesis, Dev Biol  28:12–17, 1972.
40. Tickle C: Patterning systems—from one end of the limb to the other, 
Dev Cell  4:449–458, 2003.
41. Capdevila J, Izpisua Belmonte JC: Patterning mechanisms control -
ling vertebrate limb development, Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol  17:87–132, 
2001.
42. Niswander L: Pattern formation: old models out on a limb, Nat Rev 
Genet  4:133–143, 2003.
43. Kengaku M, Capdevila J, Rodriguez-Esteban C, et al: Distinct WNT 
pathways regulating AER formation and dorsoventral polarity in the 
chick limb bud, Science  280:1274–1277, 1998.
44. Johnson RL, Riddle RD, Tabin CJ: Mechanisms of limb patterning, 
Curr Opin Genet Dev  4:535–542, 1994.
45. Kmita M, Tarchini B, Zakany J, et al: Early developmental arrest of 
mammalian limbs lacking HoxA/HoxD gene function, Nature  
435:1113–1116, 2005.
46. Riddle RD, Johnson RL, Laufer E, Tabin C: Sonic hedgehog mediates 
the polarizing activity of the ZPA, Cell 75:1401–1416, 1993.
47. Yang Y, Niswander L: Interaction between the signaling molecules 
WNT7a and SHH during vertebrate limb development: dorsal signals 
regulate anteroposterior patterning, Cell 80:939–947, 1995.
48. Laufer E, Nelson CE, Johnson RL, et al: Sonic hedgehog and Fgf-4 
act through a signaling cascade and feedback loop to integrate growth 
and patterning of the developing limb bud, Cell 79:993–1003, 1994.19 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
99. Maes C, Stockmans I, Moermans K, et al: Soluble VEGF isoforms 
are essential for establishing epiphyseal vascularization and regulating 
chondrocyte development and survival, J Clin Invest  113:188–199, 
2004.
100. Zelzer E, Olsen BR: Multiple roles of vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) in skeletal development, growth, and repair, Curr Top 
Dev Biol  65:169–187, 2005.
101. Zhou Z, Apte SS, Soininen R, et al: Impaired endochondral ossifica -
tion and angiogenesis in mice deficient in membrane-type matrix 
metalloproteinase I, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  97:4052–4057, 
2000.
102. Merida-Velasco JA, Sanchez-Montesinos I, Espin-Ferra J, et al: 
Development of the human knee joint, Anat Rec  248:269–278, 
1997.
103. Merida-Velasco JA, Sanchez-Montesinos I, Espin-Ferra J, et al: 
Development of the human knee joint ligaments, Anat Rec  248:259–
268, 1997.
104. Izumi S, Takeya M, Takagi K, Takahashi K: Ontogenetic develop -
ment of synovial A cells in fetal and neonatal rat knee joints, Cell 
Tissue Res  262:1–8, 1990.
105. Edwards JCW: Fibroblast biology: development and differentiation of 
synovial fibroblasts in arthritis, Arthritis Res  2:344–347, 2000.
106. Valencia X, Higgins JM, Kiener HP , et al: Cadherin-11 provides 
specific cellular adhesion between fibroblast-like synoviocytes, J Exp 
Med 200:1673–1679, 2004.
107. Lee DM, Kiener HP , Agarwal SK, et al: Cadherin-11 in synovial 
lining formation and pathology in arthritis, Science  315:1006–1010, 
2007.
108. Hukkanen M, Konttinen YT, Rees RG, et al: Distribution of nerve 
endings and sensory neuropeptides in rat synovium, meniscus and 
bone, Int J Tissue React  14:1–10, 1992.
109. Holmes G, Niswander L: Expression of slit-2 and slit-3 during chick 
development, Dev Dyn  222:301–307, 2001.
110. Merida-Velasco JR, Rodriguez-Vazquez JF , Merida-Velasco JA, et al: 
Development of the human temporomandibular joint, Anat Rec  
255:20–33, 1999.
111. Bradley SJ: An analysis of self-differentiation of chick limb buds in 
chorio-allantoic grafts, J Anat  107:479–490, 1970.
112. Roberts S, Evans H, Trivedi J, Menage J: Histology and pathology of 
the human intervertebral disc, J Bone Joint Surg Am  88(Suppl 2):10–
14, 2006.
113. Eyre DR, Matsui Y, Wu JJ: Collagen polymorphisms of the interver -
tebral disc, Biochem Soc Trans  30:844–848, 2001.
114. Hayes AJ, Benjamin M, Ralphs JR: Extracellular matrix in develop -
ment of the intervertebral disc. Matrix Biol  20:107–121, 2001.
115. McAlinden A, Zhu Y, Sandell LJ: Expression of type II procollagens 
during development of the human intervertebral disc, Biochem Soc 
Trans  30:831–838, 2001.
116. Zhu Y, McAlinden A, Sandell LJ: Type IIA procollagen in develop -
ment of the human intervertebral disc: regulated expression of the 
NH(2)-propeptide by enzymic processing reveals a unique develop -
mental pathway, Dev Dyn  220:350–362, 2001.
117. Pizette S, Niswander L: Early steps in limb patterning and chondro -
genesis, Novartis Found Symp  232:23–36, 2001; discussion 36–46.
118. Benjamin M, Ralphs JR: Tendons and ligaments—an overview, Histol 
Histopathol  12:1135–1144, 1997.
119. Poole AR: Cartilage in health and disease. In Koopman W, editor: 
Arthritis and allied conditions: a textbook of rheumatology , ed 15, Phila -
delphia, 2005, Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, pp 223–269.
120. Henderson B, Pettipher ER: The synovial lining cell: biology and 
pathobiology, Semin Arthritis Rheum  15:1–32, 1985.
Full references for this chapter can be found on  www.expertconsult.com .77. Ferguson CM, Miclau T, Hu D, et al: Common molecular pathways 
in skeletal morphogenesis and repair, Ann N Y Acad Sci  857:33–42, 
1998.
78. Ballock RT, O’Keefe RJ: The biology of the growth plate, J Bone Joint 
Surg Am  85:715–726, 2003.
79. Provot S, Schipani E: Molecular mechanisms of endochondral bone 
development, Biochem Biophys Res Commun  328:658–665, 2005.
80. St-Jacques B, Hammerschmidt M, McMahon AP: Indian hedgehog 
signaling regulates proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes 
and is essential for bone formation, Genes Dev  13:2072–2086, 1999.
81. Enomoto H, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Iwamoto M, et al: Cbfa1 is a 
positive regulatory factor in chondrocyte maturation, J Biol Chem  
275:8695–8702, 2000.
82. Kim IS, Otto F , Zabel B, Mundlos S: Regulation of chondrocyte dif -
ferentiation by Cbfa1, Mech Dev  80:159–170, 1999.
83. Takeda S, Bonnamy JP , Owen MJ, et al: Continuous expression of 
Cbfa1 in nonhypertrophic chondrocytes uncovers its ability to 
induce hypertrophic chondrocyte differentiation and partially rescues 
Cbfa1-deficient mice, Genes Dev  15:467–481, 2001.
84. Colnot C: Cellular and molecular interactions regulating skeletogen -
esis, J Cell Biochem  95:688–697, 2005.
85. Leboy P , Grasso-Knight G, D’Angelo M, et al: Smad-Runx interac -
tions during chondrocyte maturation, J Bone Joint Surg Am  83(Suppl 
1):S15–S22, 2001.
86. Zheng Q, Zhou G, Morello R, et al: Type X collagen gene regulation 
by Runx2 contributes directly to its hypertrophic chondrocyte-
specific expression in vivo, J Cell Biol  162:833–842, 2003.
87. Komori T, Yagi H, Nomura S, et al: Targeted disruption of Cbfa1 
results in a complete lack of bone formation owing to maturational 
arrest of osteoblasts, Cell 89:755–764, 1997.
88. Jimenez MJ, Balbin M, Lopez JM, et al: Collagenase 3 is a target of 
Cbfa1, a transcription factor of the runt gene family involved in bone 
formation, Mol Cell Biol  19:4431–4442, 1999.
89. Inada M, Yasui T, Nomura S, et al: Maturational disturbance of 
chondrocytes in Cbfa1-deficient mice, Dev Dyn  214:279–290, 1999.
90. Ortega N, Behonick DJ, Werb Z: Matrix remodeling during endo -
chondral ossification, Trends Cell Biol  14:86–93, 2004.
91. Colnot C, Lu C, Hu D, Helms JA: Distinguishing the contributions 
of the perichondrium, cartilage, and vascular endothelium to skeletal 
development, Dev Biol  269:55–69, 2004.
92. Inada M, Wang Y, Byrne MH, et al: Critical roles for collagenase-3 
(Mmp13) in development of growth plate cartilage and in endochon -
dral ossification, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  101:17192–17197, 
2004.
93. Stickens D, Behonick DJ, Ortega N, et al: Altered endochondral 
bone development in matrix metalloproteinase 13-deficient mice, 
Development  131:5883–5895, 2004.
94. Jacenko O, Chan D, Franklin A, et al: A dominant interference 
collagen X mutation disrupts hypertrophic chondrocyte pericellular 
matrix and glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan distribution in 
transgenic mice, Am J Pathol  159:2257–2269, 2001.
95. Gress CJ, Jacenko O: Growth plate compressions and altered hema -
topoiesis in collagen X null mice, J Cell Biol  149:983–993, 2000.
96. Vu TH, Shipley JM, Bergers G, et al: MMP-9/gelatinase B is a key 
regulator of growth plate angiogenesis and apoptosis of hypertrophic 
chondrocytes, Cell 93:411–422, 1998.
97. Gerber HP , Vu TH, Ryan AM, et al: VEGF couples hypertrophic 
cartilage remodeling, ossification and angiogenesis during endochon -
dral bone formation, Nat Med  5:623–628, 1999.
98. Maes C, Carmeliet P , Moermans K, et al: Impaired angiogenesis and 
endochondral bone formation in mice lacking the vascular endothe -
lial growth factor isoforms VEGF164 and VEGF188, Mech Dev  
111:61–73, 2002.19.e1 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
References
1. Simkin PA: The musculoskeletal system. A. Joints. In Klippel JH, 
Crofford LJ, Stone JH, Weyand CM, editors: Primer on the rheumatic 
diseases , ed 12, Atlanta, 2001, Arthritis Foundation, pp 5–9.
2. Olsen BR, Reginato AM, Wang W: Bone development, Annu Rev 
Cell Dev Biol  16:191–220, 2000.
3. O’Rahilly R, Gardner E: The timing and sequence of events in the 
development of the limbs in the human embryo, Anat Embryol (Berl)  
148:1–23, 1975.
4. O’Rahilly R, Gardner E: The embryology of movable joints. In Sokol -
off L, editor: The joints and synovial fluid , vol 1, New York, 1978, 
Academic Press, p 49.
5. Pacifici M, Koyama E, Iwamoto M: Mechanisms of synovial joint and 
articular cartilage formation: recent advances, but many lingering 
mysteries, Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today  75:237–248, 2005.
6. Church VL, Francis-West P: Wnt signalling during limb develop -
ment, Int J Dev Biol  46:927–936, 2002.
7. Francis-West PH, Abdelfattah A, Chen P , et al: Mechanisms of 
GDF-5 action during skeletal development, Development  126:1305–
1315, 1999.
8. Edwards CJ, Francis-West PH: Bone morphogenetic proteins in the 
development and healing of synovial joints, Semin Arthritis Rheum  
31:33–42, 2001.
9. Xu X, Weinstein M, Li C, Deng C-X: Fibroblast growth factor recep -
tors (FGFRs) and their roles in limb development, Cell Tissue Res  
296:33–43, 1999.
10. Minina E, Kreschel C, Naski MC, et al: Interaction of FGF , Ihh/
Pthlh, and BMP signaling integrates chondrocyte proliferation and 
hypertrophic differentiation, Dev Cell  3:439–449, 2002.
11. Iwamoto M, Tamamura Y, Koyama E, et al: Transcription factor ERG 
and joint and articular cartilage formation during mouse limb and 
spine skeletogenesis, Dev Biol  305:40–51, 2007.
12. Lizarraga G, Lichtler A, Upholt WB, Kosher RA: Studies on the role 
of Cux1 in regulation of the onset of joint formation in the develop -
ing limb, Dev Biol  243:44–54, 2002.
13. Hartmann C, Tabin CJ: Wnt-14 plays a pivotal role in inducing 
synovial joint formation in the developing appendicular skeleton, 
Cell 104:341–351, 2001.
14. Tsumaki N, Tanaka K, Arikawa-Hirasawa E, et al: Role of CDMP-1 
in skeletal morphogenesis: promotion of mesenchymal cell recruit -
ment and chondrocyte differentiation, J Cell Biol  144:161–173, 1999.
15. Archer CW, Dowthwaite GP , Francis-West P: Development of syno -
vial joints, Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today  69:144–155, 2003.
16. Storm EE, Kingsley DM: GDF5 coordinates bone and joint formation 
during digit development, Dev Biol  209:11–27, 1999.
17. von der Mark H, von der Mark K, Gay S: Study of differential col -
lagen synthesis during development of the chick embryo by immu -
nofluorescence. I. Preparation of collagen type I and type II specific 
antibodies and their application to early stages of the chick embryo, 
Dev Biol  48:237–249, 1976.
18. Craig FM, Bentley G, Archer CW: The spatial and temporal pattern 
of collagens I and II and keratan sulphate in the developing chick 
metatarsophalangeal joint, Development  99:383–391, 1987.
19. Morrison EH, Ferguson MW, Bayliss MT, Archer CW: The develop -
ment of articular cartilage. I. The spatial and temporal patterns of 
collagen types, J Anat  189(Pt 1):9–22, 1996.
20. Pitsillides AA, Archer CW, Prehm P , et al: Alterations in hyaluronan 
synthesis during developing joint cavitation, J Histochem Cytochem  
43:263–273, 1995.
21. Murphy JM, Heinegard R, McIntosh A, et al: Distribution of cartilage 
molecules in the developing mouse joint, Matrix Biol  18:487–497, 
1999.
22. Mundlos S, Olsen BR: Heritable diseases of the skeleton. Part II. 
Molecular insights into skeletal development-matrix components 
and their homeostasis, FASEB J  11:227–233, 1997.
23. Kavanagh E, Ashhurst DE: Development and aging of the articular 
cartilage of the rabbit knee joint: distribution of biglycan, decorin, 
and matrilin-1, J Histochem Cytochem  47:1603–1616, 1999.
24. Nalin AM, Greenlee TK Jr, Sandell LJ: Collagen gene expression 
during development of avian synovial joints: transient expression of 
types II and XI collagen genes in the joint capsule, Dev Dyn  203:352–
362, 1995.
25. Ito MM, Kida MY: Morphological and biochemical re-evaluation of 
the process of cavitation in the rat knee joint: cellular and cell strata 
alterations in the interzone, J Anat  197(Pt 4):659–679, 2000.26. Mitrovic D: Development of the diarthrodial joints in the rat embryo, 
Am J Anat  151:475–485, 1978.
27. Kimura S, Shiota K: Sequential changes of programmed cell death 
in developing fetal mouse limbs and its possible roles in limb mor -
phogenesis, J Morphol  229:337–346, 1996.
28. Colnot CI, Helms JA: A molecular analysis of matrix remodeling and 
angiogenesis during long bone development, Mech Dev  100:245–250, 
2001.
29. Roach HI, Clarke NM: Physiological cell death of chondrocytes in 
vivo is not confined to apoptosis: new observations on the mamma -
lian growth plate, J Bone Joint Surg Br  82:601–613, 2000.
30. Edwards JCW, Wilkinson LS, Jones HM, et al: The formation of 
human synovial joint cavities: a possible role for hyaluronan and 
CD44 in altered interzone cohesion, J Anat  185(Pt 2):355–367, 1994.
31. Drachman DB, Sokoloff L: The role of movement in embryonic joint 
development, Dev Biol  14:401, 1966.
32. Persson M: The role of movements in the development of sutural and 
diarthrodial joints tested by long-term paralysis of chick embryos,  
J Anat  137(Pt 3):591–599, 1983.
33. Fell HB: The histogenesis of cartilage and bone in the long bones of 
the embryonic fowl, J Morphol Physiol  40:417–459, 1925.
34. Hall BK, Miyake T: All for one and one for all: condensations and 
the initiation of skeletal development, Bioessays  22:138–147, 2000.
35. Sandell LJ, Nalin AM, Reife RA: Alternative splice form of type II 
procollagen mRNA (IIA) is predominant in skeletal precursors and 
non-cartilaginous tissues during early mouse development, Dev Dyn  
199:129–140, 1994.
36. DeLise AM, Fischer L, Tuan RS: Cellular interactions and signaling 
in cartilage development, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  8:309–334, 2000.
37. Eames BF , de la Fuente L, Helms JA: Molecular ontogeny of the 
skeleton, Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today  69:93–101, 2003.
38. Tuan RS: Biology of developmental and regenerative skeletogenesis, 
Clin Orthop Relat Res  (427):S105–S117, 2004.
39. Zwilling E: Limb morphogenesis, Dev Biol  28:12–17, 1972.
40. Tickle C: Patterning systems—from one end of the limb to the other, 
Dev Cell  4:449–458, 2003.
41. Capdevila J, Izpisua Belmonte JC: Patterning mechanisms control -
ling vertebrate limb development, Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol  17:87–132, 
2001.
42. Niswander L: Pattern formation: old models out on a limb, Nat Rev 
Genet  4:133–143, 2003.
43. Kengaku M, Capdevila J, Rodriguez-Esteban C, et al: Distinct WNT 
pathways regulating AER formation and dorsoventral polarity in the 
chick limb bud, Science  280:1274–1277, 1998.
44. Johnson RL, Riddle RD, Tabin CJ: Mechanisms of limb patterning, 
Curr Opin Genet Dev  4:535–542, 1994.
45. Kmita M, Tarchini B, Zakany J, et al: Early developmental arrest of 
mammalian limbs lacking HoxA/HoxD gene function, Nature  
435:1113–1116, 2005.
46. Riddle RD, Johnson RL, Laufer E, Tabin C: Sonic hedgehog mediates 
the polarizing activity of the ZPA, Cell 75:1401–1416, 1993.
47. Yang Y, Niswander L: Interaction between the signaling molecules 
WNT7a and SHH during vertebrate limb development: dorsal signals 
regulate anteroposterior patterning, Cell 80:939–947, 1995.
48. Laufer E, Nelson CE, Johnson RL, et al: Sonic hedgehog and Fgf-4 
act through a signaling cascade and feedback loop to integrate growth 
and patterning of the developing limb bud, Cell 79:993–1003, 1994.
49. Riddle RD, Tabin C: How limbs develop, Sci Am  280:74–79, 1999.
50. Bitgood MJ, McMahon AP: Hedgehog and Bmp genes are coex -
pressed at many diverse sites of cell-cell interaction in the mouse 
embryo, Dev Biol  172:126–138, 1995.
51. Roberts DJ, Johnson RL, Burke AC, et al: Sonic hedgehog is an 
endodermal signal inducing Bmp-4 and Hox genes during induction 
and regionalization of the chick hindgut, Development  121:3163–
3174, 1995.
52. Liu A, Wang B, Niswander LA: Mouse intraflagellar transport pro -
teins regulate both the activator and repressor functions of Gli tran -
scription factors, Development  132:3103–3111, 2005.
53. Parr BA, McMahon AP: Dorsalizing signal Wnt-7a required for 
normal polarity of D-V and A-P axes of mouse limb, Nature  374:350–
353, 1995.
54. Irvine KD, Vogt TF: Dorsal-ventral signalling in limb development, 
Curr Opin Cell Biol  8:867–876, 1997.
55. Pizette S, Niswander L: BMPs are required at two steps of limb chon -
drogenesis: formation of prechondrogenic condensations and their 
differentiation into chondrocytes, Dev Biol  219:237–249, 2000.19.e2 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
56. Derynck R, Zhang YE: Smad-dependent and Smad-independent 
pathways in TGF-beta family signalling, Nature  425:577–584, 2003.
57. Yoon BS, Lyons KM: Multiple functions of BMPs in chondrogenesis, 
J Cell Biochem  93:93–103, 2004.
58. Yoon BS, Ovchinnikov DA, Yoshii I, et al: Bmpr1a and Bmpr1b have 
overlapping functions and are essential for chondrogenesis in vivo, 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  102:5062–5067, 2005.
59. Ng LJ, Wheatley S, Muscat GE, et al: SOX9 binds DNA, activates 
transcription, and coexpresses with type II collagen during chondro -
genesis in the mouse, Dev Biol  183:108–121, 1997.
60. Lefebvre V , Huang W, Harley VR, et al: SOX9 is a potent activator 
of the chondrocyte-specific enhancer of the pro alpha1(II) collagen 
gene, Mol Cell Biol  17:2336–2346, 1997.
61. Lefebvre V , Li P , de Crombrugghe B: A new long form of Sox5 
(L-Sox5), Sox6 and Sox9 are coexpressed in chondrogenesis and 
cooperatively activate the type II collagen gene, EMBO J  17:5718–
5733, 1998.
62. Smits P , Li P , Mandel J, et al: The transcription factors L-Sox5 and 
Sox6 are essential for cartilage formation, Dev Cell  1:277–290, 2001.
63. Ducy P , Zhang R, Geoffroy V , et al: Osf2/Cbfa1: a transcriptional 
activator of osteoblast differentiation, Cell 89:747–754, 1997.
64. Otto F , Thornell AP , Crompton T, et al: Cbfa1, a candidate gene for 
cleidocranial dysplasia syndrome, is essential for osteoblast differen -
tiation and bone development, Cell 89:765–771, 1997.
65. Xu SC, Harris MA, Rubenstein JLR, et al: Bone morphogenetic 
protein-2 (BMP-2) signaling to the Col2a1  gene in chondroblasts 
requires the homeobox gene Dlx-2 , DNA Cell Biol  20:359–365, 2001.
66. Itoh N, Ornitz DM: Evolution of the Fgf and Fgfr gene families, 
Trends Genet  20:563–569, 2004.
67. Ornitz DM: FGF signaling in the developing endochondral skeleton, 
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev  16:205–213, 2005.
68. Beier F: Cell-cycle control and the cartilage growth plate, J Cell 
Physiol  202:1–8, 2005.
69. Sahni M, Ambrosetti DC, Mansukhani A, et al: FGF signaling inhib -
its chondrocyte proliferation and regulates bone development 
through the STAT-1 pathway, Genes Dev  13:1361–1366, 1999.
70. Liu Z, Xu J, Colvin JS, Ornitz DM: Coordination of chondrogenesis 
and osteogenesis by fibroblast growth factor 18, Genes Dev  16:859–
869, 2002.
71. Ohbayashi N, Shibayama M, Kurotaki Y, et al: FGF18 is required for 
normal cell proliferation and differentiation during osteogenesis and 
chondrogenesis, Genes Dev  16:870–879, 2002.
72. Kronenberg HM: PTHrP and skeletal development, Ann N Y Acad 
Sci 1068:1–13, 2006.
73. McMahon AP , Ingham PW, Tabin CJ: Developmental roles and 
clinical significance of hedgehog signaling, Curr Top Dev Biol  53:1–
114, 2003.
74. Vortkamp A, Lee K, Lanske B, et al: Regulation of rate of cartilage 
differentiation by Indian hedgehog and PTH-related protein, Science  
273:613–622, 1996.
75. Lanske B, Karaplis AC, Lee K, et al: PTH/PTHrP receptor in early 
development and Indian hedgehog-regulated bone growth, Science  
273:663–666, 1996.
76. Kobayashi T, Soegiarto DW, Yang Y, et al: Indian hedgehog stimu -
lates periarticular chondrocyte differentiation to regulate growth 
plate length independently of PTHrP , J Clin Invest  115:1734–1742, 
2005.
77. Ferguson CM, Miclau T, Hu D, et al: Common molecular pathways 
in skeletal morphogenesis and repair, Ann N Y Acad Sci  857:33–42, 
1998.
78. Ballock RT, O’Keefe RJ: The biology of the growth plate, J Bone Joint 
Surg Am  85:715–726, 2003.
79. Provot S, Schipani E: Molecular mechanisms of endochondral bone 
development, Biochem Biophys Res Commun  328:658–665, 2005.
80. St-Jacques B, Hammerschmidt M, McMahon AP: Indian hedgehog 
signaling regulates proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes 
and is essential for bone formation, Genes Dev  13:2072–2086, 1999.
81. Enomoto H, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Iwamoto M, et al: Cbfa1 is a 
positive regulatory factor in chondrocyte maturation, J Biol Chem  
275:8695–8702, 2000.
82. Kim IS, Otto F , Zabel B, Mundlos S: Regulation of chondrocyte dif -
ferentiation by Cbfa1, Mech Dev  80:159–170, 1999.
83. Takeda S, Bonnamy JP , Owen MJ, et al: Continuous expression of 
Cbfa1 in nonhypertrophic chondrocytes uncovers its ability to 
induce hypertrophic chondrocyte differentiation and partially rescues 
Cbfa1-deficient mice, Genes Dev  15:467–481, 2001.84. Colnot C: Cellular and molecular interactions regulating skeletogen -
esis, J Cell Biochem  95:688–697, 2005.
85. Leboy P , Grasso-Knight G, D’Angelo M, et al: Smad-Runx interac -
tions during chondrocyte maturation, J Bone Joint Surg Am  83(Suppl 
1):S15–S22, 2001.
86. Zheng Q, Zhou G, Morello R, et al: Type X collagen gene regulation 
by Runx2 contributes directly to its hypertrophic chondrocyte-
specific expression in vivo, J Cell Biol  162:833–842, 2003.
87. Komori T, Yagi H, Nomura S, et al: Targeted disruption of Cbfa1 
results in a complete lack of bone formation owing to maturational 
arrest of osteoblasts, Cell 89:755–764, 1997.
88. Jimenez MJ, Balbin M, Lopez JM, et al: Collagenase 3 is a target of 
Cbfa1, a transcription factor of the runt gene family involved in bone 
formation, Mol Cell Biol  19:4431–4442, 1999.
89. Inada M, Yasui T, Nomura S, et al: Maturational disturbance of 
chondrocytes in Cbfa1-deficient mice, Dev Dyn  214:279–290, 
1999.
90. Ortega N, Behonick DJ, Werb Z: Matrix remodeling during endo -
chondral ossification, Trends Cell Biol  14:86–93, 2004.
91. Colnot C, Lu C, Hu D, Helms JA: Distinguishing the contributions 
of the perichondrium, cartilage, and vascular endothelium to skeletal 
development, Dev Biol  269:55–69, 2004.
92. Inada M, Wang Y, Byrne MH, et al: Critical roles for collagenase-3 
(Mmp13) in development of growth plate cartilage and in endochon -
dral ossification, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  101:17192–17197, 
2004.
93. Stickens D, Behonick DJ, Ortega N, et al: Altered endochondral 
bone development in matrix metalloproteinase 13-deficient mice, 
Development  131:5883–5895, 2004.
94. Jacenko O, Chan D, Franklin A, et al: A dominant interference 
collagen X mutation disrupts hypertrophic chondrocyte pericellular 
matrix and glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan distribution in 
transgenic mice, Am J Pathol  159:2257–2269, 2001.
95. Gress CJ, Jacenko O: Growth plate compressions and altered hema -
topoiesis in collagen X null mice, J Cell Biol  149:983–993, 2000.
96. Vu TH, Shipley JM, Bergers G, et al: MMP-9/gelatinase B is a key 
regulator of growth plate angiogenesis and apoptosis of hypertrophic 
chondrocytes, Cell 93:411–422, 1998.
97. Gerber HP , Vu TH, Ryan AM, et al: VEGF couples hypertrophic 
cartilage remodeling, ossification and angiogenesis during endochon -
dral bone formation, Nat Med  5:623–628, 1999.
98. Maes C, Carmeliet P , Moermans K, et al: Impaired angiogenesis and 
endochondral bone formation in mice lacking the vascular endothe -
lial growth factor isoforms VEGF164 and VEGF188, Mech Dev  
111:61–73, 2002.
99. Maes C, Stockmans I, Moermans K, et al: Soluble VEGF isoforms 
are essential for establishing epiphyseal vascularization and regulating 
chondrocyte development and survival, J Clin Invest  113:188–199, 
2004.
100. Zelzer E, Olsen BR: Multiple roles of vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) in skeletal development, growth, and repair, Curr Top 
Dev Biol  65:169–187, 2005.
101. Zhou Z, Apte SS, Soininen R, et al: Impaired endochondral ossifica -
tion and angiogenesis in mice deficient in membrane-type matrix 
metalloproteinase I, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  97:4052–4057, 2000.
102. Merida-Velasco JA, Sanchez-Montesinos I, Espin-Ferra J, et al: 
Development of the human knee joint, Anat Rec  248:269–278, 1997.
103. Merida-Velasco JA, Sanchez-Montesinos I, Espin-Ferra J, et al: 
Development of the human knee joint ligaments, Anat Rec  248:259–
268, 1997.
104. Izumi S, Takeya M, Takagi K, Takahashi K: Ontogenetic develop -
ment of synovial A cells in fetal and neonatal rat knee joints, Cell 
Tissue Res  262:1–8, 1990.
105. Edwards JCW: Fibroblast biology: development and differentiation of 
synovial fibroblasts in arthritis, Arthritis Res  2:344–347, 2000.
106. Valencia X, Higgins JM, Kiener HP , et al: Cadherin-11 provides 
specific cellular adhesion between fibroblast-like synoviocytes, J Exp 
Med 200:1673–1679, 2004.
107. Lee DM, Kiener HP , Agarwal SK, et al: Cadherin-11 in synovial 
lining formation and pathology in arthritis, Science  315:1006–1010, 
2007.
108. Hukkanen M, Konttinen YT, Rees RG, et al: Distribution of nerve 
endings and sensory neuropeptides in rat synovium, meniscus and 
bone, Int J Tissue React  14:1–10, 1992.
109. Holmes G, Niswander L: Expression of slit-2 and slit-3 during chick 
development, Dev Dyn  222:301–307, 2001.19.e3 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
110. Merida-Velasco JR, Rodriguez-Vazquez JF , Merida-Velasco JA, et al: 
Development of the human temporomandibular joint, Anat Rec  
255:20–33, 1999.
111. Bradley SJ: An analysis of self-differentiation of chick limb buds in 
chorio-allantoic grafts, J Anat  107:479–490, 1970.
112. Roberts S, Evans H, Trivedi J, Menage J: Histology and pathology of 
the human intervertebral disc, J Bone Joint Surg Am  88(Suppl 2):10–
14, 2006.
113. Eyre DR, Matsui Y, Wu JJ: Collagen polymorphisms of the interver -
tebral disc, Biochem Soc Trans  30:844–848, 2001.
114. Hayes AJ, Benjamin M, Ralphs JR: Extracellular matrix in develop -
ment of the intervertebral disc. Matrix Biol  20:107–121, 2001.
115. McAlinden A, Zhu Y, Sandell LJ: Expression of type II procollagens 
during development of the human intervertebral disc, Biochem Soc 
Trans  30:831–838, 2001.
116. Zhu Y, McAlinden A, Sandell LJ: Type IIA procollagen in develop -
ment of the human intervertebral disc: regulated expression of the 
NH(2)-propeptide by enzymic processing reveals a unique develop -
mental pathway, Dev Dyn  220:350–362, 2001.
117. Pizette S, Niswander L: Early steps in limb patterning and chondro -
genesis, Novartis Found Symp  232:23–36, 2001; discussion 36–46.
118. Benjamin M, Ralphs JR: Tendons and ligaments—an overview, Histol 
Histopathol  12:1135–1144, 1997.
119. Poole AR: Cartilage in health and disease. In Koopman W,  
editor: Arthritis and allied conditions: a textbook of rheumatology , ed 15, 
Philadelphia, 2005, Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, pp 223–  
269.
120. Henderson B, Pettipher ER: The synovial lining cell: biology and 
pathobiology, Semin Arthritis Rheum  15:1–32, 1985.
121. Haywood L, Walsh DA: Vasculature of the normal and arthritic 
synovial joint, Histol Histopathol  16:277–284, 2001.
122. Tak PP , Bresnihan B: The pathogenesis and prevention of joint 
damage in rheumatoid arthritis: advances from synovial biopsy and 
tissue analysis, Arthritis Rheum  43:2619–2633, 2000.
123. Firestein GS: Evolving concepts of rheumatoid arthritis, Nature  
423:356–361, 2003.
124. Meyer LH, Franssen L, Pap T: The role of mesenchymal cells in the 
pathophysiology of inflammatory arthritis, Best Pract Res Clin Rheu -
matol  20:969–981, 2006.
125. Knedla A, Neumann E, Muller-Ladner U: Developments in the syno -
vial biology field 2006, Arthritis Res Ther  9:209, 2007.
126. Szekanecz Z, Koch AE: Macrophages and their products in rheuma -
toid arthritis, Curr Opin Rheumatol  19:289–295, 2007.
127. Bassleer R, Lhosest-Gauthier M-P , Renard A-M, et al: Histological 
structure and functions of synovium. In Franchimont P , editor: Artic -
ular synovium , Basel, Switzerland, 1982, Karger, pp 1–26.
128. Pasquali-Ronchetti I, Frizziero L, Guerra D, et al: Aging of the human 
synovium: an in vivo and ex vivo morphological study, Semin Arthritis 
Rheum  21:400–414, 1992.
129. Barland P , Novikoff AB, Hamerman D: Electron microscopy of the 
human synovial membrane, J Cell Biol  14:207–220, 1962.
130. Wilkinson LS, Pitsillides AA, Worrall JG, Edwards JC: Light micro -
scopic characterization of the fibroblast-like synovial intimal cell 
(synoviocyte), Arthritis Rheum  35:1179–1184, 1992.
131. Smith MD, Barg E, Weedon H, et al: Microarchitecture and protec -
tive mechanisms in synovial tissue from clinically and arthroscopi -
cally normal knee joints, Ann Rheum Dis  62:303–307, 2003.
132. Naito M, Umeda S, Takahashi K, Shultz LD: Macrophage differentia -
tion and granulomatous inflammation in osteopetrotic mice (op/op) 
defective in the production of CSF-1, Mol Reprod Dev  46:85–91, 
1997.
133. Smith SC, Folefac VA, Osei DK, Revell PA: An immunocytochemi -
cal study of the distribution of proline-4-hydroxylase in normal, 
osteoarthritic and rheumatoid arthritic synovium at both the light 
and electron microscopic level, Br J Rheumatol  37:287–291, 1998.
134. Qu Z, Garcia CH, O’Rourke LM, et al: Local proliferation of 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes contributes to synovial hyperplasia: 
results of proliferating cell nuclear antigen/cyclin, c-myc, and nucleo -
lar organizer region staining, Arthritis Rheum  37:212–220, 1994.
135. Walsh DA, Mapp PI, Wharton J, et al: Neuropeptide degrading 
enzymes in normal and inflamed human synovium, Am J Pathol  
142:1610–1621, 1993.
136. Morales-Ducret J, Wayner E, Elices MJ, et al: Alpha 4/beta 1 integrin 
(VLA-4) ligands in arthritis: vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 
expression in synovium and on fibroblast-like synoviocytes, J Immunol  
149:1424–1431, 1992.137. Demaziere A, Athanasou NA: Adhesion receptors of intimal and 
subintimal cells of the normal synovial membrane, J Pathol  168:209–
215, 1992.
138. Johnson BA, Haines GK, Harlow LA, Koch AE: Adhesion molecule 
expression in human synovial tissue, Arthritis Rheum  36:137–146, 
1993.
139. Kiener HP , Niederreiter B, Lee DM, et al: Cadherin 11 promotes 
invasive behavior of fibroblast-like synoviocytes, Arthritis Rheum  
60:1305–1310, 2009.
140. Simkin PA: Physiology of normal and abnormal synovium, Semin 
Arthritis Rheum  21:179–183, 1991.
141. Firestein GS: Starving the synovium: angiogenesis and inflammation 
in rheumatoid arthritis, J Clin Invest  103:3–4, 1999.
142. Walsh DA: Angiogenesis and arthritis, Rheumatology (Oxford)  
38:103–112, 1999.
143. Walsh DA, Wade M, Mapp PI, Blake DR: Focally regulated endo -
thelial proliferation and cell death in human synovium, Am J Pathol  
152:691–702, 1998.
144. Koch AE: Review. Angiogenesis: implications for rheumatoid arthri -
tis, Arthritis Rheum  41:951–962, 1998.
145. Storgard CM, Stupack DG, Jonczyk A, et al: Decreased angiogenesis 
and arthritic disease in rabbits treated with an alphavbeta3 antago -
nist, J Clin Invest  103:47–54, 1999.
146. Uchida T, Nakashima M, Hirota Y, et al: Immunohistochemical 
localisation of protein tyrosine kinase receptors Tie-1 and Tie-2 in 
synovial tissue of rheumatoid arthritis: correlation with angiogenesis 
and synovial proliferation, Ann Rheum Dis  59:607–614, 2000.
147. Gravallese EM, Pettit AR, Lee R, et al: Angiopoietin-1 is expressed 
in the synovium of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and is induced 
by tumour necrosis factor alpha, Ann Rheum Dis  62:100–107, 2003.
148. Mapp PI: Innervation of the synovium, Ann Rheum Dis  54:398–403, 
1995.
149. Seegers HC, Hood VC, Kidd BL, et al: Enhancement of angiogenesis 
by endogenous substance P release and neurokinin-1 receptors during 
neurogenic inflammation, J Pharmacol Exp Ther  306:8–12, 2003.
150. Walsh DA, Catravas J, Wharton J: Angiotensin converting enzyme 
in human synovium: increased stromal [(125)I]351A binding in rheu -
matoid arthritis, Ann Rheum Dis  59:125–131, 2000.
151. Mapp PI, Klocke R, Walsh DA, et al: Localization of 3-nitrotyrosine 
to rheumatoid and normal synovium, Arthritis Rheum  44:1534–1539, 
2001.
152. Pablos JL, Santiago B, Galindo M, et al: Synoviocyte-derived 
CXCL12 is displayed on endothelium and induces angiogenesis in 
rheumatoid arthritis, J Immunol  170:2147–2152, 2003.
153. Ferrell WR, Crighton A, Sturrock RD: Position sense at the proximal 
interphalangeal joint is distorted in patients with rheumatoid arthri -
tis of finger joints, Exp Physiol  77:675–680, 1992.
154. Dee R: Structure and function of hip joint innervation, Ann R Coll 
Surg Engl  45:357–374, 1969.
155. Buma P , Verschuren C, Versleyen D, et al: Calcitonin gene-related 
peptide, substance P and GAP-43/B-50 immunoreactivity in the 
normal and arthrotic knee joint of the mouse, Histochemistry  98:327–
339, 1992.
156. Hukkanen M, Platts LA, Corbett SA, et al: Reciprocal age-related 
changes in GAP-43/B-50, substance P and calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP) expression in rat primary sensory neurones and their 
terminals in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and subintima of the 
knee synovium, Neurosci Res  42:251–260, 2002.
157. McDougall JJ, Watkins L, Li Z: Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) 
is a modulator of joint pain in a rat model of osteoarthritis, Pain 
123:98–105, 2006.
158. Niissalo S, Hukkanen M, Imai S, et al: Neuropeptides in experimen -
tal and degenerative arthritis, Ann N Y Acad Sci  966:384–399, 2002.
159. Saito T, Koshino T: Distribution of neuropeptides in synovium of the 
knee with osteoarthritis, Clin Orthop Relat Res  (376):172–182, 2000.
160. New HV , Mudge A W: Calcitonin gene-related peptide regulates 
muscle acetylcholine receptor synthesis, Nature  323:809–811, 1986.
161. Schaible HG, Ebersberger A, Von Banchet GS: Mechanisms of pain 
in arthritis, Ann N Y Acad Sci  966:343–354, 2002.
162. McDougall JJ: Arthritis and pain: neurogenic origin of joint pain, 
Arthritis Res Ther  8:220, 2006.
163. Coggeshall RE, Hong KA, Langford LA, et al: Discharge character -
istics of fine medial articular afferents at rest and during passive 
movements of inflamed knee joints, Brain Res  272:185–188, 1983.
164. Benjamin M, Ralphs JR: The cell and developmental biology of 
tendons and ligaments, Int Rev Cytol  196:85–130, 2000.19.e4 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
165. Wang JH: Mechanobiology of tendon, J Biomech  39:1563–1582, 
2006.
166. Vogel KG, Peters JA: Histochemistry defines a proteoglycan-rich 
layer in bovine flexor tendon subjected to bending, J Musculoskelet 
Neuronal Interact  5:64–69, 2005.
167. Knott L, Tarlton JF , Bailey AJ: Chemistry of collagen cross-linking: 
biochemical changes in collagen during the partial mineralization of 
turkey leg tendon, Biochem J  322(Pt 2):535–542, 1997.
168. Ng GY, Oakes BW, Deacon OW, et al: Long-term study of the bio -
chemistry and biomechanics of anterior cruciate ligament-patellar 
tendon autografts in goats, J Orthop Res  14:851–856, 1996.
169. Canty EG, Starborg T, Lu Y, et al: Actin filaments are required for 
fibripositor-mediated collagen fibril alignment in tendon, J Biol Chem  
281:38592–38598, 2006.
170. Richardson SH, Starborg T, Lu Y, et al: Tendon development requires 
regulation of cell condensation and cell shape via cadherin-11-  
mediated cell-cell junctions, Mol Cell Biol  27:6218–6228, 2007.
171. Kannus P , Jozsa L, Kvist M, et al: The effect of immobilization on 
myotendinous junction: an ultrastructural, histochemical and immu -
nohistochemical study, Acta Physiol Scand  144:387–394, 1992.
172. Tan AL, Toumi H, Benjamin M, et al: Combined high-resolution 
magnetic resonance imaging and histological examination to explore 
the role of ligaments and tendons in the phenotypic expression of 
early hand osteoarthritis, Ann Rheum Dis  65:1267–1272, 2006.
173. Dalton S, Cawston TE, Riley GP , et al: Human shoulder tendon 
biopsy samples in organ culture produce procollagenase and tissue 
inhibitor of metalloproteinases, Ann Rheum Dis  54:571–577, 1995.
174. Jain A, Nanchahal J, Troeberg L, et al: Production of cytokines, 
vascular endothelial growth factor, matrix metalloproteinases, and 
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1 by tenosynovium demon -
strates its potential for tendon destruction in rheumatoid arthritis, 
Arthritis Rheum  44:1754–1760, 2001.
175. Tillander B, Franzen L, Norlin R: Fibronectin, MMP-1 and histologic 
changes in rotator cuff disease, J Orthop Res  20:1358–1364, 2002.
176. Jarvinen TA, Jozsa L, Kannus P , et al: Mechanical loading regulates 
the expression of tenascin-C in the myotendinous junction and 
tendon but does not induce de novo synthesis in the skeletal muscle, 
J Cell Sci  116:857–866, 2003.
177. Berenson MC, Blevins FT, Plaas AH, Vogel KG: Proteoglycans of 
human rotator cuff tendons, J Orthop Res  14:518–525, 1996.
178. Waggett AD, Ralphs JR, Kwan AP , et al: Characterization of colla -
gens and proteoglycans at the insertion of the human Achilles 
tendon, Matrix Biol  16:457–470, 1998.
179. Fukuta S, Oyama M, Kavalkovich K, et al: Identification of types II, 
IX and X collagens at the insertion site of the bovine achilles tendon, 
Matrix Biol  17:65–73, 1998.
180. Vogel KG, Meyers AB: Proteins in the tensile region of adult bovine 
deep flexor tendon, Clin Orthop Relat Res  367:S344–S355, 1999.
181. Thomopoulos S, Marquez JP , Weinberger B, et al: Collagen fiber 
orientation at the tendon to bone insertion and its influence on stress 
concentrations, J Biomech  39:1842–1851, 2006.
182. Rodeo SA, Kawamura S, Kim HJ, et al: Tendon healing in a bone 
tunnel differs at the tunnel entrance versus the tunnel exit: an effect 
of graft-tunnel motion? Am J Sports Med  34:1790–1800, 2006.
183. Sharma P , Maffulli N: Biology of tendon injury: healing, modeling 
and remodeling, J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact  6:181–190, 2006.
184. Rees JD, Wilson AM, Wolman RL: Current concepts in the manage -
ment of tendon disorders, Rheumatology (Oxford)  45:508–521, 2006.
185. Kumagai J, Sarkar K, Uhthoff HK: The collagen types in the attach -
ment zone of rotator cuff tendons in the elderly: an immunohisto -
chemical study, J Rheumatol  21:2096–2100, 1994.
186. Hoffmann A, Pelled G, Turgeman G, et al: Neotendon formation 
induced by manipulation of the Smad8 signalling pathway in mesen -
chymal stem cells, J Clin Invest  116:940–952, 2006.
187. Woo SL, Abramowitch SD, Kilger R, Liang R: Biomechanics of knee 
ligaments: injury, healing, and repair, J Biomech  39:1–20, 2006.
188. Hoffmann A, Gross G: Tendon and ligament engineering: from cell 
biology to in vivo application, Regen Med  1:563–574, 2006.
189. Bland YS, Ashhurst DE: Changes in the distribution of fibrillar col -
lagens in the collateral and cruciate ligaments of the rabbit knee joint 
during fetal and postnatal development, Histochem J  28:325–334, 
1996.
190. Nawata K, Minamizaki T, Yamashita Y, Teshima R: Development of 
the attachment zones in the rat anterior cruciate ligament: changes 
in the distributions of proliferating cells and fibrillar collagens during 
postnatal growth, J Orthop Res  20:1339–1344, 2002.191. Frank CB, Hart DA, Shrive NG: Molecular biology and biomechan -
ics of normal and healing ligaments—a review, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  
7:130–140, 1999.
192. Kaufmann P , Bose P , Prescher A: New insights into the soft-tissue 
anatomy anterior to the patella, Lancet  363:586, 2004.
193. Arnoczky SP , McDevitt CA: The meniscus: structure, function 
repair, and replacement. In Buckwalter JL, Einhorn TA, Simon SR, 
editors: Orthopaedic basic science: biology and biomechanics of the mus -
culoskeletal system , Park Ridge, Ill, 2000, American Academy of 
Orthopaedic Surgeons, pp 531–546.
194. Sweigart MA, Athanasiou KA: Toward tissue engineering of the knee 
meniscus, Tissue Eng  7:111–129, 2001.
195. Fairbank T: Knee joint changes after meniscectomy, J Bone Joint Surg 
Br 30:664, 1948.
196. Murrell GA, Maddali S, Horovitz L, et al: The effects of time course 
after anterior cruciate ligament injury in correlation with meniscal 
and cartilage loss, Am J Sports Med  29:9–14, 2001.
197. Messner K, Gao J: The menisci of the knee joint: anatomical and 
functional characteristics, and a rationale for clinical treatment,  
J Anat  193(Pt 2):161–178, 1998.
198. Mine T, Kimura M, Sakka A, Kawai S: Innervation of nociceptors in 
the menisci of the knee joint: an immunohistochemical study, Arch 
Orthop Trauma Surg  120:201–204, 2000.
199. Arnoczky SP , Warren RF: The microvasculature of the meniscus and 
its response to injury: an experimental study in the dog, Am J Sports 
Med 11:131–141, 1983.
200. Eyre DR, Muir H: The distribution of different molecular species of 
collagen in fibrous, elastic and hyaline cartilages of the pig, Biochem 
J 151:595–602, 1975.
201. McDevitt CA, Mukherjee S, Kambic H, Parker R: Emerging concepts 
of the cell biology of the meniscus, Curr Opin Orthop  13:345–350, 
2002.
202. Petersen W, Tillmann B: Collagenous fibril texture of the human 
knee joint menisci, Anat Embryol (Berl)  197:317–324, 1998.
203. Fithian DC, Kelly MA, Mow VC: Material properties and structure-
function relationships in the menisci, Clin Orthop Relat Res  252:19–
31, 1990.
204. Roughley PJ, White RJ: The dermatan sulfate proteoglycans of the 
adult human meniscus, J Orthop Res  10:631–637, 1992.
205. Bland YS, Ashhurst DE: Changes in the content of the fibrillar col -
lagens and the expression of their mRNAs in the menisci of the 
rabbit knee joint during development and ageing, Histochem J  
28:265–274, 1996.
206. McAlinden A, Dudhia J, Bolton MC, et al: Age-related changes in 
the synthesis and mRNA expression of decorin and aggrecan in 
human meniscus and articular cartilage, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  9:33–
41, 2001.
207. Ghadially FN, Lalonde JM, Wedge JH: Ultrastructure of normal and 
torn menisci of the human knee joint, J Anat  136(Pt 4):773–791, 
1993.
208. Hellio Le Graverand MP , Ou Y, Schield-Yee T, et al: The cells  
of the rabbit meniscus: their arrangement, interrelationship,  
morphological variations and cytoarchitecture, J Anat  198:525–535, 
1991.
209. Kambic HE, Futani H, McDevitt CA: Cell, matrix changes and 
alpha-smooth muscle actin expression in repair of the canine menis -
cus, Wound Repair Regen  8:554–561, 2000.
210. Ahluwalia S, Fehm M, Murray MM, et al: Distribution of smooth 
muscle actin-containing cells in the human meniscus, J Orthop Res  
19:659–664, 2001.
211. Benedek TG: A history of the understanding of cartilage, Osteoar -
thritis Cartilage  14:203–209, 2006.
212. Goldring SR: Role of bone in osteoarthritis pathogenesis, Med Clin 
North Am  93:25–35, xv, 2009.
213. Goldring MB, Goldring SR: Articular cartilage and subchondral 
bone in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis, Ann N Y Acad Sci  
1192:230–237, 2010.
214. Bailey AJ, Mansell JP , Sims TJ, Banse X: Biochemical and mechani -
cal properties of subchondral bone in osteoarthritis, Biorheology  
41:349–358, 2004.
215. Green WT Jr, Martin GN, Eanes ED, Sokoloff L: Microradiographic 
study of the calcified layer of articular cartilage, Arch Pathol  90:151–
158, 1970.
216. Reimann I, Mankin HJ, Trahan C: Quantitative histologic analyses 
of articular cartilage and subchondral bone from osteoarthritic and 
normal human hips, Acta Orthop Scand  48:63–73, 1977.19.e5 CHAPTER 1 | BIOlOgy OF THE NORmAl JOINT
217. Radin EL, Rose RM: Role of subchondral bone in the initiation and 
progression of cartilage damage, Clin Orthop Relat Res  (213):34–40, 
1986.
218. Burr DB: Anatomy and physiology of the mineralized tissues: role in 
the pathogenesis of osteoarthrosis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  12(Suppl 
A):S20–S30, 2004.
219. Buckland-Wright C: Subchondral bone changes in hand and knee 
osteoarthritis detected by radiography, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  
12(Suppl A):S10–S19, 2004.
220. Mrosek EH, Lahm A, Erggelet C, et al: Subchondral bone trauma 
causes cartilage matrix degeneration: an immunohistochemical anal -
ysis in a canine model, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  14:171–178, 2006.
221. Lane LB, Villacin A, Bullough PG: The vascularity and remodelling 
of subchondrial bone and calcified cartilage in adult human femoral 
and humeral heads: an age- and stress-related phenomenon, J Bone 
Joint Surg Br  59:272–278, 1977.
222. Walsh DA, Bonnet CS, Turner EL, et al: Angiogenesis in the 
synovium and at the osteochondral junction in osteoarthritis, Osteo -
arthritis Cartilage  15:743–751, 2007.
223. Bullough PG: The role of joint architecture in the etiology of arthri -
tis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  12(Suppl A):S2–S9, 2004.
224. Messent EA, Ward RJ, Tonkin CJ, Buckland-Wright C: Differences 
in trabecular structure between knees with and without osteoarthritis 
quantified by macro and standard radiography, respectively, Osteoar -
thritis Cartilage  14:1302–1305, 2006.
225. Coats AM, Zioupos P , Aspden RM: Material properties of subchon -
dral bone from patients with osteoporosis or osteoarthritis by micro -
indentation testing and electron probe microanalysis, Calcif Tissue Int  
73:66–71, 2003.
226. Goldring SR, Goldring MB: Bone and cartilage in osteoarthritis: is 
what’s best for one good or bad for the other? Arthritis Res Ther  
12:143, 2010.
227. El Hajjaji H, Williams JM, Devogelaer JP , et al: Treatment with 
calcitonin prevents the net loss of collagen, hyaluronan and  
proteoglycan aggregates from cartilage in the early stages of canine 
experimental osteoarthritis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage  12:904–911, 
2004.
228. Bagger YZ, Tanko LB, Alexandersen P , et al: Oral salmon calcitonin 
induced suppression of urinary collagen type II degradation in post -
menopausal women: a new potential treatment of osteoarthritis, Bone  
37:425–430, 2005.
229. Spector TD: Bisphosphonates: potential therapeutic agents for 
disease modification in osteoarthritis, Aging Clin Exp Res  15:413–418, 
2003.
230. Ham KD, Carlson CS: Effects of estrogen replacement therapy on 
bone turnover in subchondral bone and epiphyseal metaphyseal can -
cellous bone of ovariectomized cynomolgus monkeys, J Bone Miner 
Res 19:823–829, 2004.
231. Komuro H, Olee T, Kuhn K, et al: The osteoprotegerin/receptor 
activator of nuclear factor kappaB/receptor activator of nuclear factor 
kappaB ligand system in cartilage, Arthritis Rheum  44:2768–2776, 
2001.
232. Pettit AR, Ji H, von Stechow D, et al: TRANCE/RANKL knockout 
mice are protected from bone erosion in a serum transfer model of 
arthritis, Am J Pathol  159:1689–1699, 2001.
233. Zwerina J, Hayer S, Redlich K, et al: Activation of p38 MAPK is a 
key step in tumor necrosis factor-mediated inflammatory bone 
destruction, Arthritis Rheum  54:463–472, 2006.
234. Simkin PA, Bassett JE, Koh EM: Synovial perfusion in the human 
knee: a methodologic analysis, Semin Arthritis Rheum  25:56–66, 1995.
235. Kushner I, Somerville JA: Permeability of human synovial membrane 
to plasma proteins: relationship to molecular size and inflammation, 
Arthritis Rheum  14:560–570, 1971.
236. Simkin PA: Fluid dynamics of the joint space and trafficking of 
matrix products. In Seibel MJ, Robins SP , Bilezekian JP , editors: 
Dynamics of bone and cartilage metabolism , 2nd ed, New York, 2006, 
Academic Press, pp 451–456.
237. Levick JR: A method for estimating macromolecular reflection by 
human synovium, using measurements of intra-articular half lives, 
Ann Rheum Dis  57:339–344, 1998.
238. Levick JR, McDonald JN: Fluid movement across synovium in 
healthy joints: role of synovial fluid macromolecules, Ann Rheum Dis  
54:417–423, 1995.
239. Myers SL, Brandt KD: Effects of synovial fluid hyaluronan concentra -
tion and molecular size on clearance of protein from the canine knee, 
J Rheumatol  22:1732–1739, 1995.240. Gaffney K, Williams RB, Jolliffe VA, Blake DR: Intra-articular pres -
sure changes in rheumatoid and normal peripheral joints, Ann Rheum 
Dis 54:670–673, 1995.
241. Wallis WJ, Simkin PA, Nelp WB: Protein traffic in human synovial 
effusions, Arthritis Rheum  30:57–63, 1987.
242. Myers SL, O’Connor BL, Brandt KD: Accelerated clearance of 
albumin from the osteoarthritic knee: implications for interpretation 
of concentrations of “cartilage markers” in synovial fluid, J Rheumatol  
23:1744–1748, 1996.
243. Gobezie R, Kho A, Krastins B, et al: High abundance synovial fluid 
proteome: distinct profiles in health and osteoarthritis, Arthritis Res 
Ther 9:R36, 2007.
244. Hlavacek M: The role of synovial fluid filtration by cartilage in 
lubrication of synovial joints. II. Squeeze-film lubrication: homoge -
neous filtration, J Biomech  26:1151–1160, 1993.
245. Jin ZM, Dowson D, Fisher J: The effect of porosity of articular carti -
lage on the lubrication of a normal human hip joint, Proc Inst Mech 
Eng [H]  206:117–124, 1992.
246. Swann DA, Silver FH, Slayter HS, et al: The molecular structure and 
lubricating activity of lubricin isolated from bovine and human syno -
vial fluids, Biochem J  225:195–201, 1985.
247. Jay GD, Tantravahi U, Britt DE, et al: Homology of lubricin and 
superficial zone protein (SZP): products of megakaryocyte stimulating 
factor (MSF) gene expression by human synovial fibroblasts and 
articular chondrocytes localized to chromosome 1q25, J Orthop Res  
19:677–687, 2001.
248. Flannery CR, Hughes CE, Schumacher BL, et al: Articular cartilage 
superficial zone protein (SZP) is homologous to megakaryocyte stim -
ulating factor precursor and is a multifunctional proteoglycan with 
potential growth-promoting, cytoprotective, and lubricating proper -
ties in cartilage metabolism, Biochem Biophys Res Commun  254:535–
541, 1999.
249. Ikegawa S, Sano M, Koshizuka Y, Nakamura Y: Isolation, character -
ization and mapping of the mouse and human PRG4 (proteoglycan 
4) genes, Cytogenet Cell Genet  90:291–297, 2000.
250. Schmidt TA, Schumacher BL, Klein TJ, et al: Synthesis of proteo -
glycan 4 by chondrocyte subpopulations in cartilage explants, mono -
layer cultures, and resurfaced cartilage cultures, Arthritis Rheum  
50:2849–2857, 2004.
251. Funakoshi T, Spector M: Chondrogenic differentiation and lubricin 
expression of caprine infraspinatus tendon cells, J Orthop Res  28:716–
725, 2010.
252. Shine KM, Simson JA, Spector M: Lubricin distribution in the 
human intervertebral disc, J Bone Joint Surg Am  91:2205–2212, 2009.
253. Jay GD, Lane BP , Sokoloff L: Characterization of a bovine synovial 
fluid lubricating factor. III. The interaction with hyaluronic acid, 
Connect Tissue Res  28:245–255, 1992.
254. Williams PF 3rd, Powell GL, LaBerge M: Sliding friction analysis of 
phosphatidylcholine as a boundary lubricant for articular cartilage, 
Proc Inst Mech Eng [H]  207:59–66, 1993.
255. Hills BA: Boundary lubrication in vivo. Proc Inst Mech Eng  
2000;214:83-94.
256. Jay GD, Harris DA, Cha CJ: Boundary lubrication by lubricin is 
mediated by O-linked beta(1-3)Gal-GalNAc oligosaccharides, Gly-
coconj J  18:807–815, 2001.
257. Stockwell RA: Lipid content of human costal and articular cartilage, 
Ann Rheum Dis  26:481–486, 1967.
258. Pickard JE, Fisher J, Ingham E, Egan J: Investigation into the effects 
of proteins and lipids on the frictional properties of articular cartilage, 
Biomaterials  19:1807–1812, 1998.
259. Hunter W: On the structure and diseases of articulating cartilage, 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond Biol  42:514, 1743.
260. Brem H, Folkman J: Inhibition of tumor angiogenesis mediated by 
cartilage, J Exp Med  141:427–439, 1975.
261. Kuettner KE, Pauli BU: Inhibition of neovascularization by a carti -
lage factor, Ciba Found Symp  100:163–173, 1983.
262. Moses MA, Sudhalter J, Langer R: Identification of an inhibitor  
of neovascularization from cartilage, Science  248:1408–1410, 
1990.
263. Pita JC, Howell DS: Micro-biochemical studies of cartilage. In Sokol -
off L, editor: The joints and synovial fluid , New York, 1978, Academic 
Press, p 273.
264. Bywaters E: The metabolism of joint tissues, J Pathol Bacteriol  44:247, 
1937.
265. Naughton DP , Haywood R, Blake DR, et al: A comparative evalua -
tion of the metabolic profiles of normal and inflammatory knee-joint 19.e6 PART 1 | STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF BONE, JOINTS, AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
synovial fluids by high resolution proton NMR spectroscopy, FEBS 
Lett 332:221–225, 1993.
266. Strangeways T: The nutrition of the articular cartilage, Br Med J  
1:661, 1920.
267. Maroudas A, Bullough P , Swanson SA, Freeman MA: The permeabil -
ity of articular cartilage, J Bone Joint Surg Br  50:166–177, 1968.
268. Hadler NM: Synovial fluids facilitate small solute diffusivity, Ann 
Rheum Dis  39:580–585, 1980.
269. O’Hara BP , Urban JP , Maroudas A: Influence of cyclic loading on the 
nutrition of articular cartilage, Ann Rheum Dis  49:536–539, 1990.
270. Lewis P , McCutchen CW: Experimental evidence for weeping lubri -
cation in mammalian joints, Nature  184:1285, 1959.271. Mital MA, Millington PF: Osseous pathway of nutrition to articular 
cartilage of the human femoral head, Lancet  1:842, 1970.
272. Bromley M, Bertfield H, Evanson JM, Woolley DE: Bidirectional 
erosion of cartilage in the rheumatoid knee joint, Ann Rheum Dis  
44:676–681, 1985.
273. Lane LB, Bullough PG: Age-related changes in the thickness of the 
calcified zone and the number of tidemarks in adult human articular 
cartilage, J Bone Joint Surg Br  62:372–375, 1980.
274. Neusel E, Graf J: The influence of subchondral vascularisation on 
chondromalacia patellae, Arch Orthop Trauma Surg  115:313–315, 
1996.
